Copyright © 2012 by Ken Forkish
Photographs copyright © 2012 by Alan Weiner

All rights reserved.
Published in the United States by Ten Speed Press, an imprint of the Crown Publishing Group, a division of Random
House, Inc., New York.
www.crownpublishing.com
www.tenspeed.com

Ten Speed Press and the Ten Speed Press colophon are registered trademarks of Random House, Inc.

The wheat diagram is used with permission from the North American Millers Association.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Forkish, Ken.
  Flour water salt yeast : the fundamentals of artisan bread and pizza / Ken Forkish.
    p. cm.
    Includes index.
1. Bread. 2. Pizza. I. Title.
  TX769.F67 2012
  641.81’5—dc23
                                          2012012080

eISBN: 978-1-60774-274-6

v3.1

To my parents, John and Frances Forkish

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION

PART 1: THE PRINCIPLES OF ARTISAN BREAD

1: The Backstory
2: Eight Details for Great Bread and Pizza
3: Equipment and Ingredients

Essay: Where Does Our Flour Come From?

PART 2: BASIC BREAD RECIPES

4: Basic Bread Method
5: Straight Doughs
6: Doughs Made with Pre-Ferments

Essay: The Early Morning Bread Baker’s Routine

PART 3: LEVAIN BREAD RECIPES

7: Understanding Levain
8: Levain Method
9: Hybrid Leavening Doughs

Essay: The 3-Kilo Boule

10: Pure Levain Doughs

11: Advanced Levain Doughs

Essay: Making a Bread (or Pizza) Dough You Can Call Your Own

PART 4: PIZZA RECIPES

12: Pizza and Focaccia Method
13: Pizza Doughs
14: Pizza and focaccia

LAGNIAPPE

METRIC CONVERSION CHARTS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
INDEX

INTRODUCTION

I

t’s been five hundred years since I opened Ken’s Artisan Bakery in Portland, Oregon.
That’s in bakery years, of course. My bakery actually opened in 2001. I had recently
left a nearly twenty-year corporate career for the freedom of running my own venture
and doing something I loved. In the time leading up to this risky transition, before I
knew what that venture would be, I yearned for a craft and wanted to make a living doing
something I could truly call my own. But I was itchy and I didn’t know where to scratch!
For many years, I waited for that lightbulb moment of awareness that would signal an
open  path  worth  taking.  Then,  in  the  mid-1990s,  my  best  friend  gave  me  a  magazine
featuring the famed Parisian baker Lionel Poilâne. That article gave me the inspiration I
was looking for. Not long after that, I began making frequent trips to Paris, and I was
deeply  inspired  by  the  authentic,  tradition-bound boulangeries  I  visited  there. After  a
few years and a series of evolving ideas, I ended up with a perhaps naive plan to open a
French bakery somewhere in the United States. My hope was to re-create the style and
quality of the best breads, brioches, croissants, cannelés, and other specialties found at
boulangeries and patisseries all over France.

My ensuing career transition was more Mr. Toad’s Wild Ride than simple job change.
You  could  say  I  answered  the  call  of  that  ancient  Chinese  curse:  “May  you  live  in
interesting times.” But I came out on the other side with a firm love of the baker’s craft,
acknowledging it as much more hard work than romance. The daily rhythms of life as a
professional  baker, once nearly overwhelming, now provide comfort. The aromas, the
tactile nature of the work, and the way the finished products look takes me to a faraway
place that is still present, and to have that be the way I spend my days continues to thrill
me.

ABOUT THIS BOOK

I  was  fortunate  to  train  with  many  excellent  bakers  in  the  United  States  plus  two  in
France during the two-year between-careers period before I opened my own bakeshop in
Portland.  What  struck  me  during  my  professional  baking  training  was  that  the  most
important lessons I was learning—how to use long fermentation, pre-ferments, autolyse,
and  temperature  management,  for  example—were  not  discussed  in  any  of  the  bread
books  I  had  read.  I  later  encountered  books  that  did  detail  these  things  (like  those  by
Raymond Calvel and Michel Suas), but they were targeted to the professional. I was sure
that the techniques I had learned could apply to the home baker too.

In the years that followed the opening of Ken’s Artisan Bakery, several notable baking
books were published. But I still saw an opportunity to address the techniques used in a
good artisan bakery and how they could be adopted for the home kitchen. I wanted to
write a book that didn’t totally dumb down these techniques, since the concepts really
aren’t that difficult for the nonprofessional baker to apply. And I wanted to break from
the mold prevalent in almost every bread book out there (at least until very recently): that
every recipe had to use a rise time of just one to two hours. Further, I was completely
motivated  to  demonstrate  how  good  bread  can  be  when  it’s  made  from  just  the  four
principle ingredients: flour, water, salt, and yeast.

I also saw the opportunity to address how to make great bread at home with each of
the three principle techniques of dough fermentation: straight doughs, doughs made with
pre-ferments, and levain doughs, including an easy, unintimidating method for making a
levain culture from scratch in just five days using only whole grain flour and water.

In order to accurately use this book’s recipes and follow its logic, I ask you to use an

inexpensive  digital  kitchen scale  to  execute  the  recipes  and  to  help  you  understand
baking. One of the fundamentals of artisan baking is using weight measurements instead
of cups and tablespoons and being guided by the ratios of ingredients. (Don’t worry, I do
all  the  simple  math  for  you.)  While  the  ingredients  tables  in  each  recipe  do  include
volume  conversions,  these  measurements  are  by  their  nature  imprecise  (for  reasons
explained in chapter 2) and they are included only to allow you to bake from this book
while you are contemplating which digital kitchen scale to buy.

My purpose in writing this book is twofold: First, I want to entice novices to bake, so
it is written for a broad audience. Total beginners can dive right in with one of the entry-
level  recipes, the  Saturday  Breads,  for  example,  right  after  reading chapter  4,  Basic
Bread  Method.  Once  you  feel  comfortable  with  the  timing  and  techniques  involved  in
those  breads,  try  recipes  that  involve  an  extra  step,  like  mixing  a  poolish  the  night
before. Once you have mastered the poolish and biga recipes, try making a levain from
scratch and enjoy the particular pleasures of bread or pizza dough made with this culture.
By the time you work your way through this book, you will be baking bread in your home
kitchen  that  has  a  quality  level  approaching  that  of  the  best  bakeries  anywhere,  along
with Neapolitan-style pizza that would make your nonna smile.

Second, this book is also written for more experienced bakers who are looking for
another approach to making dough—one that treats time and temperature as ingredients—
and  who  are  perhaps  looking  for  an  accessible  (or  just  different)  method  for  making
great-tasting  levain  breads.  Mixing  dough  by  hand,  a  process  used  in  all  this  book’s
recipes, may also be new. To me, one of the most unique and important aspects of bread
baking is its tactile nature. In asking you to mix the dough by hand, I am also asking you
to think of your hand as an implement. Mixing by hand is easier than using a mixer, is
fully effective, and teaches you the feel of the dough. People have been mixing dough by
hand for thousands of years. If our ancestors did it, we can. And if you haven’t done it
before, I hope you get great satisfaction from the process and feel a connection to the
past and the history of baking, like I do.

FUNDAMENTALS AND METHODS

When you read the recipes in this book, you’ll see that they tend to be quite similar in
many regards. All of the breads and pizza doughs call for 1,000 grams of flour and often
have only slightly differing quantities of water and salt. Although they do vary in types of
flour used, in some cases the main differences are in type of leavening and the timeline
for development of the dough. Altering these variables can produce a wide variety of
breads from very similar formulas. The format of the ingredients lists is designed to help
you  see  these  relationships.  Basically,  they  are  baker’s  percentage  tables.  As  you’ll

notice,  the  ingredients  aren’t  always  listed  in  the  order  in  which  they’re  used;  rather,
flour, water, salt, and yeast are always listed in that order, descending by weight. This
allows you to compare recipes at a glance.

Each  recipe  in  this  book  uses  the  same  techniques  for  mixing,  folding  the  dough,
shaping loaves, and baking, so it should be pretty easy to move from one fermentation
method in this book to another. As I committed to designing every bread recipe to make
round loaves baked in a Dutch oven, I realized that once readers become familiar with
my  techniques,  all  of  the  recipes  in  this  book  become  accessible,  without  the  need  to
learn new techniques for each recipe.

Whether you’re a first-time baker or someone who already has two dozen bread books
on your shelf, this book explains how to use the same methods we use at Ken’s Artisan
Bakery to make great bread at home. If you’re a beginner and feel intimidated by some of
the tools or techniques used in my bread recipes, don’t be! With a little bit of planning
(and maybe a few new pieces equipment, which I promise you’ll use again and again),
you are well on your way to professional-quality bread.

Your Choice of Baking Schedules

The best breads are those with methods that allow plenty of time for flavor to develop.
Time  does  most  of  the  work  for  you.  Good  flavors  build  while  you  sleep.  Schedule
management, a critical aspect of a professional baker’s life, applies in the home kitchen
too. But offering just a single schedule for making dough (for example, mixing the dough
in the evening, letting it develop overnight, shaping it in the morning, and baking a couple
hours later) may not work for you. So in this book, I provide recipes that operate on a
variety  of  schedules,  each  using  a  long  fermentation  time,  so  you  can  work  with  the
schedule  that  accommodates  your  other  obligations.  You  can  mix  the  dough  in  the
morning and bake in time for dinner, mix the dough in the evening and bake in time for
the next day’s lunch, or mix the dough in the afternoon and bake loaves first thing the next
morning. Making these recipes does require a little planning, but each step of any given
recipe takes just a modest amount of time. Because of the extended schedules, many of
the recipes may only work for you on your weekend, but even if a recipe takes twenty-
four hours to prepare, it won’t require constant attention.

Dutch Oven Baking

In the past, I struggled to bake bread in my home oven that had the texture, crust color,
and oven spring (the initial boost the dough gets in its first ten minutes in the hot oven,
caused by the last furious burst of yeast activity) we get at my bakery using the 15,000-

pound Italian deck oven, with steam at the push of a button. I owe a particular debt to
two recent books that introduced the use of Dutch ovens that fit inside a standard home
oven for baking crusty, colorful loaves: Jim  Lahey’s My Bread  and Chad  Robertson’s
Tartine Bread. Each book recognizes that the previous techniques for home-baked hearth
bread, most often baked on a pizza stone with myriad methods for producing steam, were
insufficient for recreating the oven steam we enjoy as professional bakers.

The first time I baked in my two Dutch ovens, an Emile Henry enameled model and a
Lodge cast-iron model, I immediately decided to approach all the baking for this book in
the same way (save for pizza and focaccia, which are best on a baking stone—although
an iron skillet or sheet pan will also work). Simply placing a loaf in a preheated Dutch
oven and baking with the lid on allows the moisture from the dough to steam the loaf as it
bakes. The results are decidedly superior to those attained using a baking stone, yielding
great oven spring and a dark and beautiful crust with the right texture—thin and crisp. I
encourage you to bake until the crust develops dark crimson and ochre colors. Pull a loaf
out of the oven too soon and you may be losing out on the best flavors the crust has to
give.

Recipe Yields

Each of the bread recipes in this book makes two loaves. As I was testing the recipes my
home  kitchen,  I  often  found  myself  baking  one  loaf  of  bread  and  using  the  remaining
dough to make focaccia or pizza. Some people believe this is how focaccia originated,
with bakeries in Liguria using “extra” dough to make flat bread topped with whatever
was in season (or with olive oil and salt, or simply left plain). Some bread doughs are
more suited to or focaccia than others, so each recipe in this book advises you whether
you can pizza or focaccia with any extra dough, allowing you to get two great things to
eat from one dough mix.

Unique Recipes for Pizza and Focaccia

Pizza is a kind of bread too, and pizzas are a natural extension of the product line for
many bakers. Bakeries throughout Italy, for example, display pizza or focaccia with their
bread, often on a counter, sliced to order. The same principles of dough management that
apply to artisan bread baking apply equally to pizza—long, slow dough development for
the best flavor, color, and texture.

I love pizza! At my restaurant, Ken’s Artisan Pizza, we make our pizza dough with the
same care as our bread dough, and in this book I have four pizza dough recipes, again
with  varying  schedules,  using  both  store-bought  yeast  and  a  levain  culture.  The
techniques I use for making pizza dough are the same as those for bread dough. Start at
either end of the book; once you’ve learned how to make pizza or bread dough, it will be
a straightforward transition to learn the other.

USING THIS BOOK

All  of  the  bread  recipes  in  this  book  use  the  same  basic  techniques,  and  those  are
described  in  detail  in chapter  4,  Basic  Bread  Method:  weighing  the  ingredients,
autolysing (premixing) the flour and water, mixing the dough, applying folds, shaping
loaves,  proofing,  and  baking. Chapter 8, Levain Method, describes how to start a new
levain culture and how to feed it, store it in the refrigerator, and restore it for its next
use. Chapter 12, Pizza and Focaccia Method, explains the techniques for making pizza
from the recipes in this book.

Basically,  these  three  method  chapters  explain  the  “how”  of  the  book’s  recipes.

Chapter 2 explains the “what” and “why”—that is to say, the logic behind the methods
and the specific details that characterize artisan baking. If you want to cut to the chase
and just start baking bread, read chapter 4, Basic Bread Method, and then start with the
Saturday White Bread recipe. If you want to be better informed, spend some time with
chapter 2.

The Recipes

The recipes in this book are presented in three parts. Part 2, Basic Bread Recipes, offers
recipes for breads made with store-bought instant yeast. In chapter 5, you’ll find recipes
for long-fermented simple doughs (called straight doughs), which vary in regard to the
blend of flours used and the schedule. In chapter 6, you’ll find recipes for doughs made
with  pre-ferments  (specifically,  biga  and  poolish),  which  take  just  a  little  more  work
than straight doughs (five to ten minutes the evening before) but yield breads with more
complexity in flavor.

Part 3, Levain Bread Recipes, teaches you how to make a pungent, bubbly, and fully
effective levain culture from whole wheat flour and water in five days with little effort.
Creating your own starter culture is a fun science project that makes memorable, crusty,
beautiful loaves. Chapter 9 offers recipes for breads with hybrid leavening, which have
the unique character of levain breads but also incorporate commercial yeast to give the
bread  a  lighter  crumb  and  a  little  extra  lift.  In chapter 10 you’ll find recipes for pure
levain  breads  (i.e.,  breads  that  have  no  commercial  yeast),  and  finally,  in chapter  11,
you’ll find two advanced levain recipes. As you work your way through part 3 of the
book,  you’ll  learn  how  to  manipulate  the  variables  of  a  levain  to  achieve  specific
qualities in the bread. Ultimately, you can use this information to create a bread that is

truly your own and matches your taste preferences, as described in the essay “Making a
Bread (or Pizza) Dough You Can Call Your Own”.

Part 4, Pizza Recipes, is all about how to make delicious pizza and focaccia at home
using a pizza stone, a skillet, or a sheet pan. As mentioned, chapter 12 provides basic
methods  for  pizza  and  focaccia.  In chapter  13  you’ll  find  four  dough  recipes,  and  in
chapter 14 you’ll find sauces and recipes for pizzas and focaccia with toppings. Use the
best  ingredients—good  flour,  good  cheese,  San Marzano  tomatoes—and  follow  my
instructions, and you’ll be able to make excellent pizza at home. (Being spoiled by the
wood-fired oven at my restaurant, I high-fived my dog, Gomez, when I saw killer pizza
coming out of my standard home kitchen oven.) It’s fun, and it really isn’t hard to do. As
with making bread, making pizza is something you get better at with repeated efforts. It’s
like a positive habit: do it and you want to do it again and again until you’ve mastered it.

Fun Bits to Add Flavor

Writing this book inspired me to riff on a few subjects: either experiences that I lived
through (like the failed attempt to open my first bakery) or things that fascinate me (like
the  fact  that  a  loaf  of  bread  weighing  over  6  pounds  actually  improves  with  age and
tastes better than smaller loaves made from the same dough).

Chapter 1 tells the tale of my journey from a Silicon Valley career to the hands-on
work of crafting rustic French bread as a professional baker. In part 1 of the book, you’ll
find the essay “Where Does Our Flour Come From?” I take you on a tour of two of the
family farms that grow the wheat that gets milled into the flour we use at my bakery and
pizzeria.  Evocative  photography,  commentary  from  the  farmers,  and  a  review  of  how
they  manage  their  land  brings  home  how  people  like  Karl  Kupers  and  Fred  Fleming,

founders of Shepherd’s Grain, are rethinking wheat farming to meet the needs of the land,
family farms, and bakers. People often want to know what goes on in the dark hours of
the early morning at the bakery. To satisfy that curiosity, in  part 2 of the book I’ve given
you  a  detailed  account  of  a  morning  representative  of  what’s  typical  in  “The  Early
Morning Bread Baker’s Routine.” The essay offers a voyeuristic peek into the nonstop
synchronized activity of our bakery.

In part 3 of the book I’ve included the essay “The 3-Kilo Boule,”  explaining  why  I
love these massive loaves and share some of their interesting history. My hope is that
this book will provide you not only with recipes for bread that will truly impress you,
but also a clear understanding of the processes we use at Ken’s Artisan Bakery and how
they apply in the home kitchen. Once you have this foundation of knowledge, you can use
the  information  in  the  essay “Making  a  Bread  (or  Pizza)  Dough  You  Can  Call  Your
Own” (also in part 3) to craft your own unique breads.

Baking is a craft that makes you want to do it again and again, trying various flour
blends, improving your shaping technique, or simply following the same procedure but
trying to do it better with each repetition to improve the flavor of your bread, the volume
of the loaf, or perhaps the color of the crust. Repetition is part of the pleasure. And once
you get a rhythm and learn the techniques, the repetition gives a warming satisfaction that
comes from the familiar comfort of doing something well. Bon appétit.

PART 1
THE PRINCIPLES OF ARTISAN BREAD

CHAPTER 1
THE BACKSTORY

I

t was exhilarating when I quit the last job I hated. I was ready to move on and leap into
the unknown future of my life as a baker. Unexpectedly, however, the dream took a
detour—or maybe just a longer, more scenic route.

THE KERNEL OF THE IDEA

Flash back to 1995: I was wearing a suit every day, trying to meet my sales quota each
year, and drinking the company Kool-Aid. One day that year, my buddy Tim Holt gave
me a copy of the January issue of Smithsonian magazine, which featured a cover article
about  the  famed Lionel  Poilâne.  Reading  the  article,  I  realized  I  had  found  my  muse.
Poilâne was a French baker running his father’s bakeshop at 8 rue du Cherche-Midi on
Paris’s Left Bank. Lionel coined the phrase “retro-innovation” as a measure of progress.
He  was  possessed  by  the  old-world  ways  of  making  great  bread:  using  human  hands,
time, and fire as an artisan’s instruments. These techniques required patience, and they
had  largely  been  neglected  in  postwar  France  as  industrialized  baking  methods  were
widely adopted and the quality of French bread, long an icon, declined.

With his genius for promotion and his passionate embrace of bread made in the old
way  (pain  d’autrefois),  Lionel  Poilâne  helped  repopularize  rustic  country  breads,
naturally leavened, made by hand, and baked in wood-fired ovens by men who worked
hard in hot, steamy basements at a physically demanding job. (Ask these guys about the
romance of baking!) His was the craft of an artisan. Poilâne’s ingredients were stone-
milled wheat flour, water, and sea salt. A 1.9-kilo miche could last an entire week.

Miche  A  large,  rustic boule,  or  round  loaf  of  bread,  which  can
weigh 3 kilograms (6.6 pounds) or more.

His earthy breads were described as having a winelike complexity, and people lined
up  on  the  sidewalk  to  buy  them  from  the  iconic boulangerie.  A  charismatic  and

knowledgeable promoter, Lionel replicated the wood-fired oven routines of his family’s
boulangerie on a large scale outside of Paris during the 1980s and began shipping his
big round loaves around the world, baking about fifteen thousand loaves a day in twenty-
four  wood-fired  ovens.  Lionel’s  brother, Max  Poilâne,  went  on  to  open  his  own
wonderful boulangerie  in  Paris’  15th  arrondissement.  The  two  brothers  made  near-
identical loaves the way their father had taught them to: in big rounds weighing almost 2
kilos (4.4 pounds) apiece. (Sadly, Lionel, his wife, Irena, and their dog died in 2002
when the helicopter Lionel was piloting crashed during a fierce storm in high winds off
the  coast  of  Brittany.)  Both  brothers—along  with  many  other  Parisian  bakers,  I  later
discovered—were fueled by traditionalist convictions about bread baking that inspired
me. And even though I’d never worked as a craftsman or had any kind of job related to
food, as I held the magazine in my hands I knew instantly, at a very deep level, that being
this kind of baker was right for me. It was a certainty like none I had ever experienced.

Prior  to  reading  the  Poilâne  piece  in Smithsonian,  my  personal  experience  with
baking bread was a recipe for an herb bread with dill, anise deeds, parsley, and a lot of
sugar. The method involved using a whisk—a whisk! I made that bread often, and at the
time, I liked it. But I had no reference point for bread at its best, and it was unlikely to be
found in the United States anyway. When I lived in London in 1989 and often traveled in
Europe for my job at IBM, I loved looking in the windows of pastry shops, butchers, and
cheese  shops  and  eating  foods  specific  to  the  place  I  was  in.  I  found  these  markets
inspiring and could tell they had been making the same great food in the same way for
generations. I asked myself why we didn’t have places like these at home and whether I
could perhaps someday bring some of the transcendent goodness, quality, and timeless
character of these shops back home in a venture of my own. But I had only strands of
ideas—nothing concrete that rang true.

I remember sitting in my backyard in Virginia under a cherry tree in full bloom on a
warm, sunny spring afternoon, reading my first issue of the quarterly newsletter of the
Bread  Bakers  Guild  of  America.  Cue  the  chirping  bluebirds.  The  Poilâne  piece  in
Smithsonian had inspired me to join the guild as an entry point into the world of good
bakers. Reading about serious professionals baking good bread spoke to my soul—and
fueled fantasies of rising at 3 a.m. to bake bread. (What are you, nuts?!) This issue of
the  newsletter  had  a  feature  on  Lionel  Poilâne’s  visit  to  the  guild’s  annual  dinner,
another on the U.S. baking team winning the bread category for the first time at the Coupe
du Monde de la Boulangerie, and an excellent piece by the original seer of the Guild,
Tom McMahon, about the importance of connection between bakers and the farmers who
grow  their  wheat  (a  connection  I  finally  achieved  ten  years  later  when  I  switched  to
Shepherd’s Grain flours). Tom had a clear, high-level vision that promoted his ideals of
advancing  both  the  quality  of  bread  and  environmental  responsibility.  Throughout  the
newsletter—my first glimpse into the minds of the bakers and owners of good artisan

bakeries—I  detected  a  sense  of  mission  and  passion.  It  helped  water  the  seed  of  my
desire  first  sown  by  the Smithsonian  article  about  Poilâne.  I  finished  reading  the
newsletter,  and  I  still  remember  how,  at  that  very  time,  it  seemed  right  that  I  should
become one of them.

Until I escaped the corporate womb and became a baker in earnest, I did what I could
to  learn  about  the  world  of  artisan  baking  from  the  outside  looking  in.  I  visited  many
bakeries  in  Paris  during  trips  there,  two  or  three  times  each  year.  (I  had  a  Parisian
girlfriend—how  convenient!)  I  bought  baking  books.  My  heroes  were  French  bread
bakers: Moisan, Poujauran, Kamir, Ganachaud, Kayser, Gosselin, Saibron, and others.

In  the  late  1990s  I  read  about  a  couple  of  bakeries  in  northern  California: Della
Fattoria  and Bay  Village  Bakery.  They  baked  the  kind  of  bread  I  wanted  to  bake,  in
wood-fired ovens (I was absolutely certain that I was going to be a wood-fired oven
baker like Poilâne—a certainty later changed by a firmer grip on reality) and their bake
houses were in their backyards. I thought that sounded perfect! After two decades of big
city commuting on jammed freeways, the thought of walking across my backyard to get to
work was alluring to say the least. These bakeries were also idealistic, as mine would
be, using organic flour and employing the best-quality methods to make the finest bread
they knew how to bake. And they were successful. Della Fattoria was selling bread to
the French Laundry in Napa (this was before Thomas Keller opened Bouchon Bakery).
Bay Village was developing a reputation for having the best rustic breads in the country,
and Chad Robertson was mobbed every time he went to the farmers’ market in Berkeley
to sell his bread.

I knew that I needed to learn how to bake bread at this level, and my Bread Bakers
Guild newsletters made it clear that the best options were at the San Francisco Baking
Institute and the newly opened (and now closed) National Baking Center in Minneapolis.
I wanted to learn from multiple people and then adapt the collage of lessons into my own
baking style. In August of 1999, soon after chucking my last job, I was off to the San
Francisco  Baking  Institute  to  take  Artisan  Breads  I  and  II,  two  weeks  of  hands-on
instruction. I’d finally made the break from my corporate career and I was a free man
about to learn a new trade. A free man. Maybe a little crazy.

LEARNING THE CRAFT

I’ll never forget my first day at the institute. Ian Duffy, our instructor, had us each mix a
small amount of dough by hand—wet, sticky dough. I was trying to work the dough the
way Ian did: his hands developed it, turned it, and folded it, and before long it was a
smooth ball with an outside skin soft and smooth as a baby’s bottom. Then I’d try, and
I’d have dough sticking everywhere. No soft, baby’s-butt dough skin, just a red face and
an  oh-shit-what-was-I-thinking  exclamation  point  in  my  head.  That  night  I  went  to  my
hotel more than a little worried that maybe this wasn’t the career for me. But by the end
of  two  weeks  I  could  handle  the  dough  okay,  and  with  all  of  the  great  instruction  I’d
received, I thought that with a lot of practice at home maybe I could start to get the feel
for this stuff.

While I was in northern California, I met Chad Robertson and Elisabeth Prueitt (now
quite famous for their work at Tartine in San Francisco) at Bay Village Bakery in Point
Reyes, and Chad and I began a conversation that lasted for years about levains, milling,
French  versus  American  flour,  and  the  fermentation  needed  to  bake  the  kind  of  old-
school French country bread I was after. Chad’s bread was the best I’d ever had in the
United States. It was baked to a dark chestnut brown and had gentle flavors of wheat and
fermentation, and the character of the crust seeped into the soft, light interior. It tasted
fantastic, and it was beautiful too. I thought his bread was in league with that of the best
boulangeries I had visited in Paris.

Chad did all of his bread baking as a solo act. After a ten-second commute through his

yard, he mixed the levain and the doughs, chopped wood, built the fire for the oven, and,
many hours later, swept out the oven to prepare it for baking. In the filtered sunlight of a
Marin  afternoon,  Chad  divided  and  shaped  his  dough  by  hand.  The  next  morning  he
would bake magnificent bread in the intense radiant heat of his oven, loading loaves in
and out on a peel by hand. I left that first visit with Chad nodding my head up and down
and thinking, “Yeah, this is it for me.”

Next I stopped to visit Della Fattoria in Petaluma, California, where they were baking
dramatic  round  loaves  decorated  with  grape  leaves,  destined  for  the  annual  Sonoma
Valley  Harvest  Wine Auction.  I  stood  out  of  their  way  as  they  baked  these  loaves  in
side-by-side wood-fired ovens built and designed by Alan Scott—the same kind Chad
had at Bay Village. I was taking pictures, and if there was something I could do to help
them out, I did it. The bakery, run by Ed and Kathleen Weber and their son Aaron, is in
the  most  idyllic  setting.  The  bake  house  is  attached  to  their  home  on  fifteen  acres  of
Petaluma  farmland,  with  beautifully  tended  gardens  and  a  lot  of  small,  life-is-good
details that showed me they were living a great life on their own terms, and it was paid
for by baking good bread. Again, I thought, “Yeah, this is it for me.” I rode with Ed as he
delivered the loaves to the auction, and when I came back Aaron asked if I wanted to
come bake with them for a week or two. What a great offer! This was my first chance to
spend  time  in  a  live  craft  bakery,  and  the  Webers  were  extremely  generous  and
forthcoming. It’s fun to look back on those days—getting up at 5 a.m. and walking toward
my future, down the Webers’ lawn to the bake house, staring up at a night full of brilliant
stars, about to be humbled by more sticky dough.

After  my  informal  “apprenticeship”  with  the  Webers  (really,  just  one  week),  I  was
ready to continue my instruction. I knew I was going to need more pastry skills, and the
National  Baking  Center  in  Minneapolis  had  two  great  instructors, Philippe  Le  Corre
teaching pastry, and Didier Rosada teaching advanced bread baking classes. Two weeks
there, plus a one-week pastry class with Robert Jorin at the CIA in Napa, rounded out
my formal training. Chad and Liz, after they moved Bay Village Bakery to a retail spot in
Mill  Valley,  were  also  very  generous  sharing  many  of  their  lessons,  and  they  let  me
observe their bakery’s operation during multiple visits. Without their help my first years
at my own bakery would have been even more challenging than they ended up being, and
their quality was the gold standard that I aspired to. This kind of give-back and sharing,
while being pretty common in the food service trade, is totally not what happens in the
last industry I worked in. Small business has so much more heart than big business.

It was time for me to set up a wood-fired oven in my own backyard bakery. Not long
before, I had moved into the perfect setting to be near the rest of my family, who had all
migrated to Eugene, Oregon. I had a cool house on five acres with a 1,200-square-foot
outbuilding that I could convert into a bake house. The zoning allowed for a small home
business,  and  the  house  wasn’t  part  of  any  homeowners’  association  that  might  have
rules against this kind of thing. It looked like a great setup. Plus, I had time to learn the
craft, convert the outbuilding, and, before too long, begin my career as a baker—or so I
thought.

BUT FOR THE SMELL OF BAKING BREAD

When I moved to Eugene, I assumed all I needed to do to start my enterprise was get a
business license, build the bakery, and begin to bake bread. To my surprise, a community
uprising  against  my  little  venture  developed,  and  the  intense  energy  with  which  my
neighbors pursued their goal created a public NIMBY fuss that landed on the front page
of  the  newspaper,  on  the  local  TV  news,  and  in  a  pair  of  two-hour  public  hearings
where  one  neighbor  after  another  took  the  stand  to  rage  against,  among  other  things,
having to smell bread baking every single day: “like Sisyphus, pushing the same rock up
the hill, every day into eternity,” according to their attorney. Smoke from my chimney
stack  was  going  to  exaggerate  respiratory  problems  for  one  family,  whose  house  was
several  hundred  yards  away.  Sparks  from  the  chimney  were  going  to  burn  down  the
entire neighborhood. The bakery would turn into a tourist attraction, causing too much
traffic in the neighborhood. My driveway was too steep for a fire truck to navigate in the
event of a fire. Ashes from my oven were going to change the pH balance of the soil.

Trash  from  the  bakery  was  going  to  attract  rodents.  It  was  an  Alice  in  Wonderland
construct  where  just  saying  something  makes  it  true;  the  process  seemed  to  me  to  be
anything but a court of rational appeal.

The residents of eleven out of eighteen homes in the small neighborhood wrote letters

protesting the plans for the bakery. Here is a favorite excerpt of mine:

Flour  dust  can  be  very  explosive.  A  dropped  bag  of  raw  flour  can  be  ignited  in
much the same way as volatile fluids. This may be one of the hazards of baking, but
it does not belong in a residential area.

In the course of due process, the legal burden was on me to refute any and all claims,
no matter how seemingly absurd, like the exploding bags of flour. I produced a certified
letter  from  the  State  of  Oregon’s  climatologist  identifying  the  direction  of  prevailing
winds by month. (Away from the neighbors 44 percent of the time, but that didn’t account
for  days  of  air  stagnation,  it  turns  out. Who  knew?)  I  had  certification  from  an
environmental engineering firm stating that the emissions output from the oven would be
no greater than that from a standard woodstove. I should have tried tossing a bag of flour
in the courtroom to see if it would explode.

After a pair of lengthy public hearings, four months of angst, and county files at least
eighteen inches thick, the final ruling was to deny my application for a business license
to run my little bakery in a zone that allowed home businesses. It was time to shift mental
gears.

“Trust thyself: every heart vibrates to that iron string.”
—Ralph Waldo Emerson

Immediately,  I  was  anxious  to  put  Eugene  in  my  rearview  mirror.  Too  bad  about  the
house; I loved that place. But where to? I decided to start with a fresh plan and give up
on the idyllic and admittedly safer route of opening a low-expense backyard startup. I
embarked on a mission to find a new town in which to open my idealized retail bakery.
To finance this ambitious—and expensive—venture, I would sell my house and apply
most  of  my  savings,  risking  everything  I  had.  I  wanted  to  move  somewhere  I  might
actually  be  welcomed,  where  people  would  appreciate  buttery  croissants  that  shatter
when you bite into them, crisp cannelés perfumed with vanilla and beeswax, and rustic
country breads—a place where nobody would complain about the smell of baking bread.
Where would it be?

IN SEARCH OF PORTLAND

I drew up a list of things the town needed to have: good weather (hindsight snicker), an
active restaurant scene that wasn’t stodgy, and a good farm-to-table sense. After a six-
month  quest,  which  included  stops  in  San  Luis  Obispo, Yountville,  Boulder,  Denver,
Maryland’s Eastern Shore, and Monterey, as well as two weeks of training at l’Institut
Paul Bocuse in France (yes, I got to meet the man, at his restaurant, and yes, his big beefy
hands rested on my shoulders for a photo that I never received—sounds like a fish story,
I know), I finally settled on Portland.

I  barely  knew  the  place,  but  it  had  me  hooked  for  reasons  my  future  self  would
understand  better  than  I  did  at  the  time.  Now,  I  realize  that  I  was  drawn  to  Portland
because so many of its craftsmen were (and still are) doing production on a smaller, less
industrial scale, with a focus on quality. Our hands are our most important tools. Our
customers can associate names and faces with the food they eat and the beverage they
drink. These things are characteristic of the word “artisan” and a principal reason why I
named my bakery “Ken’s Artisan Bakery.” In Portland, it is not unusual to know who
made the beer or wine we are drinking, the cheese we are eating, or the salami on our
pizza—and that’s how I knew it was the place for me.

That said, it is difficult enough to open a restaurant or bakery in a town you know and
make it work—especially if you have no history in that line of work. Going into a city
where nobody knew me was absolutely insane. But I had a bad case of tunnel vision and
I could only see the light at the end: my own bakery in a place I was pretty sure I’d love.
Over  a  three  month  period,  with  layout  and  design  help  from Michel  Suas  of TMB
Baking (a sister company of the San Francisco Baking Institute), I built the bakery in a
shell of a space in an old neighborhood in Portland filled with bars and restaurants. My
oven, the big mixer, and the other major equipment I’d ordered all arrived together in a
single container that entered the United States at the port of Newport News, Virginia, and
then came to me on a flatbed truck. The truck arrived at about 8 o’clock on a cold, rainy
weekday night in early November. Along with a team of new hires and our superhero
installer,  Carlos,  I  met  the  driver  in  front of the bakery and unloaded the truck with a
rented forklift. The delivery was a day later than expected. I remember the driver calling
from outside Boise, Idaho, letting me know he had a bad toothache and needed to see a
dentist but was going to drive through the night to get to me. I had images of the Italian
oven and French mixer I had been waiting for all those months, which had traveled from
Europe by boat, toppling down some mountain pass between toothache and here.

All  of  the  equipment  was  installed  in  mid-November  2001,  and  we  opened  on
November 21. New hires all around me and I was running the place—my first food job.
The shock of the previous two years—misfiring in Eugene, figuring out where to open
my bakery, selling my house in Eugene, finding a space in Portland, and getting the place
up and running—then suddenly being open and selling bread and pastry? Whoa, that’s a
big one. But in one moment the past was behind me, and all that mattered was getting

people in the door. Ken’s Artisan Bakery was born.

FIRST IMPRESSIONS

The neighborhood where the bakery was located had the highest population density of
any  place  between  Seattle  and  San  Francisco.  But  the  neighborhood  was  filled  with
modest rental apartments, and the per capita income data concerned me. I was going to
compete on quality, not price. We opened just two months after September 11. During a
recession.  And  the  carb-fearing  Atkins  and  South  Beach  diets  were  peaking  in
popularity. Portland set a record for most consecutive days with measurable rain. The
unemployment  rate  was  around  12  percent  at  the  time.  Today,  an  ambitious  bakery
opening would get instant media attention. At that time it barely got a mention. So we had
an intermittent trickle of customers, friends, and family coming through the door, along
with curious passersby and a few drunks.

Some  people  appreciated  our  efforts,  recognized  our  ambitions,  and  understood  the
quality of our ingredients and our intention to produce bread and pastry according to my
idealized  vision.  Now,  I  tend  to  remember  the  things  that  went  wrong  more  than  the
things that went right. Our first sheeter, used to laminate croissant and puff pastry dough,
was too small. Making it work required that we prop boards on overturned trash cans at
either end to catch the dough as it ran back and forth between the rollers. The cannelés
were inconsistent, but when they were on they were fantastic. We were baking all of our
pastries in the deck oven, and constantly reaching into the oven’s upper decks for sheet
pans gave us all a series of nasty accidental sheet pan burns on our forearms.

I arrived at 4 a.m. each morning, mixed the baguette dough, helped with the morning
pastry work, and baked levain breads that had been chilled overnight. Then I divided,
shaped, and baked baguettes, with the first batch coming out of the oven around 8:30 a.m.

People who came in at 8 or 8:15 a.m. were often angry or dismayed that the baguettes
weren’t  ready  yet  and  sometimes  taunted  us  with  comments  like  “You  call  yourself  a
French bakery?” I absolutely couldn’t arrive at the bakery any earlier than 4 a.m., and
although I could have theoretically put the baguettes in the oven before 8 o’clock, they
wouldn’t have been as good. Still, the accusatory glares were hard to take. Our French
customers were the most aggravated. I needed to know what people thought of our stuff,
but  these  comments  kind  of  pissed  me  off,  too.  It  was  an  open  bakery.  We  were
vulnerable to impressions of all kinds.

The retarder, a walk-in cooler where all of the shaped levain breads spend the night
for a long, slow, cool fermentation, had some idiosyncrasies. Every week, on Monday, it
would shut down. Without telling me first. Before Christmas in 2001 we were closed
Mondays, so I never noticed. Of course, Christmas Eve and New Year’s Eve fell on a
Monday that year. On Christmas Eve morning, I arrived at the bakery a little early, just
before 4 a.m., looking forward to baking and selling bread that would be on people’s
holiday  tables.  Then  I  opened  the  door  to  the  retarder  and  was  greeted  by  a  blast  of
warm,  humid,  slightly  sour  air  and  loaves  overflowing  their  proofing  boards,  totally
overproofed and beyond any hope of being worth baking. Still, I baked a dozen or so just
to see what I could get, and what I got was lousy, sour loaves, each about the size and
shape  of  a  double-wide  size  20  low-top  basketball  shoe. Merde! All  I  could  do  was
bake  the  day’s  baguettes  and  be  sold  out  of  lousy,  sour  bread  by  about  10  a.m. Cory
Schreiber, chef-owner of nearby Wildwood Restaurant, walked in and kindly bought one
of the pathetic, flat levain loaves—and gave me a shoulder to lean on. Thanks, man. Still,
I didn’t understand the problem. I thought the retarder shut off because of something I’d
done  wrong. And  at  that  point,  six  weeks  into  running  the  bakery  without  a  day  off,
working from 4 a.m. to 6 p.m. or later every day, my judgment was a little cloudy. The
following  Monday,  New Year’s  Eve  day,  the  same  thing  happened  again.  Waaah!  On
January 2 I made some calls and learned that I was using the retarder on a seven-day
program cycle, which needed to be refreshed each week, otherwise it went into proofing
mode and warmed up. (Yeah, I noticed.) Some lessons we learn the hard way.

Whenever  I  felt  like  we  were  starting  to  find  a  rhythm  in  our  production,  a  new
problem would jolt me back to reality. Like the fact that I repeatedly had to crawl on top
of  the  500°F  oven  whose  burner  sometimes  stopped  firing  in  the  middle  of  my  bread
bake to replace a blown fuse (deep breath), only to realize months later that the wrong
value fuse was in one of the sockets, and I kept replacing the wrong fuse with another
wrong fuse. Sigh. One time, at 5 a.m., I pushed one of the buttons on the bread oven for
steam,  but  instead  of  steam  I  saw  a  river  of  water  flowing  from  beneath  the  oven.  I
quickly popped a lower front panel off the oven and saw a burst rubber hose, and the
water wasn’t stopping! Throw the shutoff valve. Inspect. Grab a kitchen knife. Cut the
hose just before the break. Reattach it to the pipe and secure with a hose clamp. Then run

and grab the mop bucket and a pile of towels for cleanup. This happened over and over
for several months. Bad hose. Who gets a bad hose? Nobody said this was going to be
easy, but jeez.

I baked the levain breads to a dark caramel color on the outside. I was really proud of
those loaves, but Portland didn’t seem very impressed. So I put together a handout titled
“Why  We  Bake  It  Dark.”  I’m  not  sure  it  helped  much,  but  I  felt  the  need  to  explain
myself. We used Valrhona chocolate for our chocolate croissants (and still do). I also
made  a  true pain au chocolat:  a  thick  slice  of  freshly  baked  levain  bread  covered  in
butter and shavings of chocolate and sprinkled with a dash of fleur de sel. We sold at
least two or three of those each day. I typically let a few loaves of unbaked levain sit out
until they were well overproofed and gassy, then compressed the gas out of them, cut
them into fougasse, and then baked them. We sold some of them plain and others brushed
with olive oil and with fleur de sel sprinkled on top, like giant pretzels. My pastry chef,
Angie, made beautiful apple tarts, chocolate and coffee éclairs, puff pastry with pears,
chocolate  tarts,  brioche, financiers,  macarons,  brownies,  profiteroles  with  different
fillings, gougères, gâteaux de riz, and galettes des pérouges. People would walk in and
ask if we had any scones. Or they would hear we were making cannelés, come in, and
ask,  “Where  are  the  cannolis?”  People  pronounced  artisan  “artesian.”  I  set  out  to
replicate the bread and pastries of a good boulangerie in Paris, so I shouldn’t have been
surprised when people here didn’t recognize all the things we made. Today they mostly
do. Portland’s food scene has changed a lot in the past decade.

We  used  organic  flour,  Tahitian  vanilla  beans,  Niman  Ranch  ham,  bags  of  sea  salt
from  Brittany,  aged  Gruyère,  the  best  butter  I  could  buy,  and,  as  mentioned,  Valrhona
chocolate.  I  imported  tea  from  Mariage  Frères  in  Paris.  We  made  everything  from
scratch, and there was usually more staff present at any point in time than customers. We
charged $2.50 for a chocolate croissant, and people gave me the stink-eye. I found a note
in the comments box that said, “$2.50 for an herbal tea and hot water. You have lost this
customer  for  good!”  Other  people  complained  that  there  weren’t  free  coffee  refills.
Many people let us know that our pastries were too small, appeared to be overbaked,
and were too expensive ($3.50 for a 4-inch fruit tart, $2.50 for an apple turnover, $1.75
for a handmade butter croissant). At least nobody was complaining about the smell of
bread baking.

Those were the most intense days of my life. By necessity, I’m tempted to say, and I’m
not sure why. Maybe the transformation from a desk-job career to this intensely physical,
sleep-deprived work required a kind of shock treatment as segue.

At the end of the day, after fourteen hours at the bakery, I remember cleaning out the
big mixer, my head in its bowl, and thinking about my heroes—all the great chefs I had
read about, who were known for their all-day work ethic. If they could put in those kinds
of hours, I thought, I can do it too. I knew I was truly tired when one day I noticed the

sound of my feet dragging across the floor. I was past feeling it. I was probably past
good judgment too. About three months after the bakery opened, I finally took a day off. I
slept for a solid twelve hours, and when I woke up I felt like a zombie with a severe
case of jet lag.

PROOF OF CONCEPT

Despite the initial challenges, I remained optimistic about the future, because that was
my only option. Positive feedback started coming in to help balance the negative things.
We kept a small green suggestion box out by the coffee station, with pieces of paper and
pens (people stole the pens!). I got a much-needed boost in confidence from comments
like these:

“The bakery is extraordinary. The best I have been to in the United States.”
“We just returned from ten days in Paris and visited a number of well-known bakeries

—none of the croissants we tried came close to yours.”

“We came today for our four o’clock snack with my son, and I wanted to let you know
that we loved the pain au chocolat, the profiteroles, and the brioche. It felt like home!
Thank you for that pleasure.”

“Don’t change anything. It’s superb!”
In addition, a few good restaurants made inquiries about buying our bread, and I knew
I needed the money from wholesale accounts if the bakery was going to make it. When I
was ready to buy a delivery van and begin that new phase, I was proud that our first
three  restaurant  accounts—Paley’s  Place,  Higgins,  and  Bluehour—were  (and  remain)
among  Portland’s  best  restaurants.  That  gave  me  some  sorely  needed  revenue  and
visibility.

They gave me tremendous support in other ways, as well. Greg Higgins featured my
apple  bread  on  a  special  menu  one  night,  and  Vitaly  Paley  did  a  tasting  menu  event

On a more serious note, by the end of the bakery’s first year I had lost almost $70,000
and greatly feared I’d have to close down. I didn’t have much cash left. Plus, I hadn’t
received  any  publicity  or  reviews  other  than  a  Sunday  feature  by  Sara Perry  in  the
Oregonian’s Living section. I believed that what we were offering was unique, and we
had dialed in our quality and consistency after a lot of refinement during our first five or
six months. But it seemed like nobody was paying attention. Ego was part of the media
deal, but more than anything else, I needed press to give us credibility with the buying
public who maybe didn’t know we were worth the trip. (This was before the days of the
hyperactive foodie blogosphere.)

So I decided to try to make some waves on my own. Our first event was a special
bread tasting. I ordered a couple loaves of pain Poilâne, which you can order online for
overnight delivery, and had Grand Central Bakery and Pearl Bakery bring some of their
breads to my place. The event was friendly, not competitive. I wanted people to taste my
bread alongside France’s most famous bakery’s. This unusual event—a bread tasting!—
brought in at least 150 people and got them to focus on bread and its flavors—a rare
standalone subject (as evidenced by the fact that we really don’t have the same breadth
of vocabulary to describe the flavor of bread as we do for wine, beer, or select other
things). I was pleased with people’s reactions to my bread, still a new product on the
local scene, especially as it compared favorably with Poilâne’s, a benchmark for me.

featuring my bread in every course. Other chefs also lent a hand. Dan Spitz, at Ripe, did
a similar dinner. Some restaurants put my name on their menus when they featured my
bread.  In  one  case,  the  menu  read,  “Nice  buns,  Ken!”  Many  of  these  chefs  also
generously offered advice whenever I needed it.

Cash  flow  gradually  improved,  but  we  weren’t  out  of  the  woods  yet.  Then  the  city
informed me that the street at my intersection was soon going to be closed during the
daytime hours for the next three months while underground water pipes were replaced. I
had a daytime business. I feared this was going to be the final dagger. But as I thought
about how the city would be putting the street back together at the end of each workday, I
wondered  about  trying  to  do  some  nighttime  business  while  continuing  the  daytime
bakery operation. I hatched an idea that involved getting a liquor license, selling beer
and wine, and turning the bakery’s cafe into an evening hangout offering simple fare.

Around  this  time  I  met Rollie  Wesen  and Claudine  Pépin,  who  had  just  moved  to
Portland from New York. Claudine is  Jacques Pépin’s daughter, famous in her own right
for doing TV shows on PBS with her dad and writing several cookbooks with him, in
addition  to  her  own  TV  appearances  and  working  as  brand  ambassador  for  Moët  &
Chandon. Rollie is a chef who had worked at a number of hot New York restaurants.
Both were looking for work, and each appreciated the bakery. I couldn’t pay what either
was worth, but they joined the team, and with Rollie in the makeshift kitchen (no stove!)
and Claudine running the cafe, Ken’s Artisan Bakery became a simple bistro five nights

each week, offering a weeklong plat du jour of coq au vin, duck confit, or some other
classic. This finally got us the media attention I both craved and needed, and the press
extended  beyond  the  bistro  to  my  obsessiveness  about  baking.  Eventually,  Rollie  and
Claudine both ended up leaving for jobs that paid closer to what they were worth, and
after eight months I closed down the bistro with a cassoulet party that sold out in a day.
Turning the bakery into a restaurant was fine as an experiment, and it helped bridge a
gap.

In  January  2003, Jim  Dixon  wrote  a  piece  about  the  bakery  for Willamette  Week ,
titled “Yeast of Burden” (which was nominated for a James Beard award in journalism).
“Slicing into a loaf, you feel the crust crackle, but it’s not tough or too chewy. The crumb
is soft, moist and riddled with the holes created by expanding fermentation gases. It has
that yeasty, nutlike wheat taste typical of good rustic bread, but there’s another, deeper
level of complex flavor that’s hard to pin down. It makes you want to keep eating.” He
also referred to baking as my obsession, and as I got more press, it seemed “obsessive”
was  the  operative  word  in  pieces  about  me.  Seeing  anything  written  about  the  bakery
was gratifying after the loud boom of media silence during the first thirteen months.

Finally, people started coming—people from all over. We were sort of prepared, and
sort  of  not  prepared.  Baked  goods  aren’t  like  restaurant  fare;  we  can’t  make  them  on
demand. We start almost everything at least the day before, so we have to guess: How
many baguettes are we going to sell tomorrow? How many éclairs, croissants, and tarts?
One day André Soltner, the former chef of the famed New York restaurant Lutèce, and
his wife, Simone, walked into the bakery. Chef Soltner later told Claudine  and Rollie
that my croissants were extraordinary. Then Claudine brought her dad into the bakery,
and we had dinner together. He was equally complimentary of my croissant, saying it
was among the best he’d ever eaten. He was so kind and very gracious. Having dinner in
my bakery with Jacques Pépin, I was floating. These visits from some of my heroes and
their praise gave me much-needed confidence.

Over time, when I could afford to hire enough staff to create a more sane schedule for
myself, we managed to bake baguettes a little earlier in the morning. And comments that
we  bake  our  bread  and  pastries  too  dark  decreased.  Maybe  I  adjusted;  maybe  my
customers did. Maybe we met in the middle. (Maybe they actually read my “Why We
Bake It Dark” manifesto?) The greatest reward in those first years was when it became
clear  that  most  people  really  enjoyed  the  food  we  were  making.  We  had  a  growing
number  of  regulars  come  in  day  after  day,  week  after  week.  We  watched  as  their
children grew up before our eyes. And now we have been around long enough to have
seen customers that we loved pass on. Having a positive impact on the community was
never possible in my previous career. Once it became evident that we weren’t going to
fail, that my landlord wasn’t going to get stuck with a bankrupt bakery, I could stop being
nervous that someday I might have to go back to my old life. The work really is its own

reward.

CHAPTER 2
EIGHT DETAILS FOR GREAT BREAD
AND PIZZA

I

n this chapter, I’ll explain some key, fundamental elements of artisan baking that define
my breads. If you just want to cut to the chase and start baking, turn to chapter 4, Basic
Bread Method, and chapter 5, Straight Doughs, and return to this chapter (and the rest
of part 1) when you have time. That said, don’t be afraid to read on. The material in

this chapter isn’t complicated.

If you think of bread baking as a fermentation craft, then you can orient your thinking to
consider the fermentation variables that impact taste and texture. Since this concept may
be  new  for  many  readers,  I  want  to  emphasize  that  the  most  important  ingredient  for
making  good  bread  is  plenty  of  time.  This  does,  of  course,  have  its  limits.  If  dough
ferments for too long, an excess of alcohol and acidity will develop, masking the sweet
flavors of the wheat. In addition, the dough’s physical ability to hold the gases produced
by  fermentation  will  break  down  and  it  will  slowly  collapse.  Managing  dough
fermentation  to  get  the  best  results  means  finding  the  perfect  balance  of  rising  time,
proofing time, dough temperature, ambient temperature, and amount of leavening in the
dough. A major focus of this chapter is explaining how to achieve a harmony of these
elements.

DETAIL 1: THINK OF TIME AND TEMPERATURE AS
INGREDIENTS

Patience is indeed a virtue when it comes to making good bread. Consider time to be a
powerful instrument in the baker’s tool kit. Recognizing time as a discrete and crucial
element in a recipe is the first detail that sets the best bakers apart. If you manipulate
time in proper balance with dough temperature, ambient temperature, and the amount of
leavening in the dough, you give yourself a chance to make something special. You need

enough time, but not much effort—a little over seven hours for the simplest recipes in
this book—to achieve a really good loaf.

In the United States, the traditional approach to baking bread has been to think of the
rise as simply a short amount of time—just an hour or two—necessary for gas to build
up  in  the  dough  to  give  it  structure.  I  and  other  good  bakers  view  the  rise  as  an
opportunity to build flavor and an appropriate amount of acidity.

Temperature and time have an inverse relationship, and I like the visual image of a
seesaw to communicate the need for balance between the two: more of one means you
need less of the other. A warm dough develops more quickly, whereas a cooler dough
develops more slowly. Specifically, dough temperature affects the metabolic rate of the
yeast: warmer yeast replicates more quickly. Once a dough is mixed, the yeast replicates
until  no  oxygen  remains  in  the  dough,  at  which  point  the  yeast  cells,  as  they  consume
sugars from the flour, begin to produce gases (carbon dioxide and ethanol). Sugar in, gas
out. This gas production is what causes the dough to rise.

Bulk  fermentation  The  first  rise  of  the  dough  after  all  of  the
ingredients have been mixed together (flour, water, salt, and yeast,
plus any levain or pre-fermented doughs).

Extending  the  bulk  fermentation  stage  is  critical  to  maximum  flavor  development.
Warmer  dough  encourages  more  rapid  reproduction  of  the  yeast,  and  thus  faster
fermentation. On the other hand, using less yeast when mixing the dough means it will
take  longer  for  the  yeast  to  replicate  and  build  up  its  population  to  its  max:  the  point
where the dough is anaerobic, or completely depleted of oxygen. Up to a point, doughs
that  take  longer  to  develop  (whether  due  to  cooler  temperatures,  using  less  yeast,  or
both) yield breads with a more complex flavor. In fact, this is a key principle that guides
me  in  developing  all  of  my  bread  recipes:  Less  yeast  and  more  time  yields  a  better
bread.

Another factor in the evolution of dough is bacteria; flour naturally contains both yeast
and a wide variety of bacterial spores. As with natural yeast fermentation, it takes time
for  these  naturally  occurring  bacteria  to  grow  and  produce  acids  and  other  flavor
components. Bacterial growth also contributes to complexity of flavor, by which I mean
the way multiple flavor elements in a good bread hit your palate at the same time: flavors
from the flour and all of the products the yeast and bacteria produce, including alcohols,
acids, and esters (chemical compounds that produce aromas and flavors).

Time  is  a  critical  factor  in  the  production  of  all  of  these  compounds.  What  we  are
looking  for  is  the  fermentation  “sweet  spot.”  Too  much  time  can  throw  the  flavor
elements  out of balance, whereas not enough time diminishes their development in the
first  place.  When  a  dough  is  overdeveloped,  the  alcohol  becomes  too  strong,

overpowering the sweetness of the wheat. Longer developing time also causes dough to
become more acidic. Up to a point, this is a good thing. More acidity in bread means it
stays fresh longer, and lactic and acetic acids add valuable and unique flavors, aromas,
and sensations. However, too much acidity creates a cloying aftertaste that many people,
including me, find disagreeable. The trick is finding the right balance between time and
temperature so the dough develops a desirable complexity of flavors without becoming
too acid or dominated by alcohols, while simultaneously getting optimal development of
the structure of the dough. The gluten that holds gas bubbles to create rise and air pockets
breaks down with time, and therefore overproofed dough will collapse. On top of all
this, the timing needs to work for your schedule too!

WEIGHT VERSUS VOLUME MEASUREMENTS

If you are to get consistent results, compare recipes, and, after a few repetitions be
able  to  essentially  memorize  recipes,  you’ll  find  it  extremely  beneficial  to  use
measurements  by  weight,  not  volume.  For  starters,  2  cups  of  my  flour  won’t  be
precisely the same amount as 2 cups of your flour. Mine might be packed a little
tighter,  yours  might  be  looser.  With  water,  although  a  difference  of  a  few
tablespoons  may  hardly  be  noticeable  visually,  the  weight  will  be  significantly
different.  Baking  is  based  on  specific  ratios  between  ingredients,  and  these  are
imprecise  when  using  volume  measurements,  but  predictable  when  using weight
measurements. In professional and high-caliber baking, the standard is to measure
all ingredients by weight and express the quantity in relation to the total amount of
flour in the recipe. I encourage you to use weight rather than volume measurements
for the recipes in this book.

That having been said, many bakers have yet to invest in a kitchen scale. For those
bakers,  I  have  included  approximate  volume  conversions  for  all  the  ingredients
used  in  this  book.  Flour  is  the  most  difficult  ingredient  to  measure  accurately  by
volume, since so many variables are in play: how coarsely the flour is ground, how
tightly  the  flour  is  packed  into  the  measuring  cups,  whether  or  not  the  flour  is
leveled once it has been placed in the measuring cup, and more. These variables do
not  come  into  play  when  flour  is  measured  instead  by  weight.  To  ensure  some
consistency,  all  of  the  recipes  in  this  book  were  tested  using  King Arthur  brand
flour—so  the  volume  measurements  correspond  to  the  coarseness  of  that  brand’s
grain.  When  measuring  flour  by  volume  instead  of  weight,  transfer  the  flour  to  a

large  container,  fluff  it  with  a  fork,  and  then  spoon  it  into  the  measuring  cup  or
spoon until full. Then, use the edge of a knife to level the top of the flour. (If this
sounds like a pain, good … buy a kitchen scale!)

Of  course,  when  you’re  baking  a  bread  that  involves  a  pre-ferment,  volume
measurements  really  go  out  the  window.  Many  of  my  recipes  call  for  using  100
grams of levain, which is a bit more than ⅓ cup. The problem is, when you scoop
out  the  levain  and  transfer  it  to  measuring  cups  or  spoons,  you  degas  the  levain
(which makes measurements less reliable). So I cannot overemphasize the value of
measuring by weight, not volume, especially once you get to part 3 of this book.

MANIPULATING THE FINAL MIX TEMPERATURE

For all of my breads, I’ve achieved the best flavor when the freshly mixed dough
has a temperature between 75ºF and 80ºF (24ºC and 27ºC). The subsequent timing
in  the  recipes  and  quality  of  the  final  product  depends  on  achieving  this

temperature.  When  you’ve  mixed  your  final  dough  and  are  about  to  cover  it  for
rising, or bulk fermentation, take a temperature reading with a probe thermometer. If
the dough doesn’t fall between 75ºF and 80ºF (24ºC and 27ºC), you should make
adjustments next time.

To  control  the temperature  of  the  mixed  dough,  you  need  to  work  with  four
variables: water temperature, flour temperature, room temperature, and the length of
the autolyse (pronounced “auto-lease”). The easiest variable to manipulate is the
water temperature, and I’ll give you some guidelines about using warmer or cooler
water.  If  you  pay  attention  to  your  results  (and  keep  notes),  after  a  couple  of
attempts  you  should  be  able  to  figure  out  the  ideal  water  temperature  for  mixing
your dough.

Most of the recipes in this book specify a target temperature of 78ºF (26ºC) for the
final  mixed  dough.  I  consider  this  to  be  the  sweet  spot,  but  I  encourage  you  to
experiment with different temperatures between 75ºF and 80ºF (24ºC and 27ºC).
The only way to find the optimum combination of time and temperature that gives
the best flavor and volume in a given recipe is to repeat and adjust based on what
you  did  last  time.  It’s  part  of  the  fun  of  baking.  Each  time,  write  down  the
temperature of the dough as soon as it’s mixed and note what time it is. Also record
the time when you do each of the remaining steps and, of course, note how your
bread turns out. If you keep a log of temperatures and fermentation times for future
reference,  you  can  methodically  fine-tune  your  process  to  achieve  perfect  bread.
You also get the satisfaction that comes with being a baker who is fully tuned in to
what you are doing and why you are doing it.

The  recipes  in  this  book  specify  water  temperatures  to  use.  I  prefer  warmer
temperatures for water and dough than some bakers do, along with a smaller amount
of  yeast.  Be  careful  not  to  use  water  that  is  too  hot.  Commercial  yeast  dies  at
temperatures as low as about 114ºF (46ºC). When I mix flour at room temperature,
which is usually about 70ºF (21ºC) and water at 95ºF (35ºC) and let the mixture
rest  for  30  minutes,  the  dough  ends  up  at  about  78ºF  (26ºC)  once  I’m  finished
mixing.  That’s  my  target  temperature.  If  it’s  summer  and  warmer  in  the  room  (in
which case the flour is probably warmer too), I use water at 90ºF (32ºC) to hit my
target dough temperature of 78ºF (26ºC). If you keep your flour in the refrigerator
or freezer, I recommend that you pull it out a day before mixing dough. All of the
recipes in this book assume the flour is at room temperature.

Retarder A cool chamber that literally retards the development of
the dough. At my bakery the retarder is a walk-in unit that holds six
rolling racks, and we hold the temperature at about 49ºF (9ºC). You
can use your refrigerator to retard loaves at home, as many recipes
in this book do.

There  are  several  ways  to  extend  fermentation  time:  you  can  reduce  the  amount  of
yeast in the dough, you can reduce the temperature of the dough or of the area where it’s
is  fermenting,  or  you  can  do  both.  If  I’m  working  with  a  levain  dough  that  normally
reaches full maturity in an 80°F (27°C) room in three hours, I can put it in the retarder at
my  bakery  at  49°F  (about  9°C)  and  it  will  instead  take twelve  hours  to  completely
develop.  The  extended,  cold  fermentation  yields  a  better  bread  with  a  more  complex
flavor and a rich, well-rounded aftertaste. While we do use cold bulk fermentation for
doughs at the bakery, doing so is less practical at home, where it can be difficult to find
room in the refrigerator for the 12-quart Cambro tubs that I recommend. For this book, I
adjusted recipes so that overnight doughs are bulk fermented with small amounts of yeast
at room temperature. You’ll notice that some doughs in this book are bulk fermented at
room temperature and then proofed overnight in the refrigerator at temperatures of 37°F

to 40°F (about 3°C to 5°C)—this is because it’s easier to find space in your refrigerator
for proofing baskets than a giant dough tub.

As you read this chapter, you might be thinking, “I don’t know what to do with this
information.”  Here’s  the  deal:  Making  good  bread  is  never  completely  formulaic.  No
matter how specific I am in writing a recipe, there will be variables that are outside my
control or yours. Some flour is more “active” and ferments faster than other flour. Your
kitchen may be at 70°F (21°C) and someone else’s might be at 80°F (27°C). That’s why
most  recipes  in  other  books  simply  default  to  a  timeline  for  bulk  dough  development
followed with “or until doubled in size.” The recipes in this book are designed to take
the variables into account. Beyond that, in this section I’m trying to help you develop an
awareness of how time and temperature affect the taste and development of the dough,
and how you can manipulate those variables to produce exceptional bread.

THREE DEGREES OF SEPARATION

The raisin-pecan bread we make at my bakery tastes so good that sometimes I just
keep eating it even when I’m not hungry. I love this bread when it’s at its best. But
there  was  a  period  when  that  bread  tasted  just  ordinary,  and  I  figured  that  it
probably  wasn’t  getting  the  full  amount  of  fermentation  it  needed  to  completely
develop its flavor. I spoke with the morning bakers and found that the bread was
getting a complete proof (meaning it was getting the time and rise it needed after
shaping). Therefore, the problem was probably that the dough needed to develop
more during bulk fermentation. However, I couldn’t play with the schedule because
the bakers’ shifts were already synchronized with other things. Manipulating time
wasn’t an option, so my choices were to play with one of three other variables: the
amount of leavening in the dough, the ambient temperature of the bulk fermentation
stage, or the temperature of the dough after its final mix. I decided to experiment
with the latter and mixed the dough with water that was 3ºF (about 2ºC) warmer
than what we had been using. Whereas our dough had been coming out of the mixer
at 75ºF (24ºC), with the warmer water the finished dough was at 78ºF (26ºC). All
of  the  other  variables  remained  the  same.  The  next  day  the  bread  was  just  as  it
should  be:  complete,  full  of  flavor,  and  not  sour,  with  just  a  gentle  background
tingle in the mouth.

DETAIL 2: USE PRE-FERMENTS WHEN TIME ALLOWS

The  recipes  in  this  book  use  one  of  two  approaches  to  making  bread  with  a  complex
flavor profile. The first approach is to make what’s called a straight dough with a slow
rise,  which  means  using  less  yeast  and  allowing  much  more  time  for  rising  than  in
traditional  recipes—at  least  five  hours  between  mixing  and  shaping  into  loaves.  The
second approach is enhancing fermentation by adding pre-fermented dough or a levain
made up many hours before being included in the final dough mix.

Poolish and biga are examples of commonly used pre-ferments. Both are made with a
very  small  amount  of  commercial  yeast.  When  using  a  pre-ferment,  you  mix  30  to  80
percent of the total flour in the recipe with water and a small amount of yeast ahead of
time, let it ferment (usually overnight), and then add the resulting bubbly, fragrant pre-
fermented  mixture  to  the  rest  of  the  ingredients  in  the  final  dough.  This  process  lends
greater complexity of flavor to the bread, along with more acidity for longer keeping and
richer colors and flavors in the crust. In commercial bakeries, the use of pre-ferments
allows for a shorter first rise of the final dough without sacrificing quality, which often
works better for production schedules.

Why take this extra step in the home kitchen? For better tasting bread, of course! It
will have a little more complexity in flavor than bread from a straight dough, typically. A
poolish is particularly suited to making bread with a creamy, slightly nutty character and
a  crisp,  thin  crust.  Baguette  dough  is  often  made  with  a  poolish. A  biga,  on  the  other
hand, can give breads an earthy, musky flavor profile. At my bakery we use a biga to
make ciabatta. Other types of pre-ferments not featured in this book include sponges and
so-called  old  dough  (pâte  fermentée  in  French).  Some  pre-ferments  contain  salt  and
some  don’t.  What  all  types  of  pre-ferments  have  in  common,  regardless  of  name  and
type,  is  that  each  allows  for  the  development  of  alcohol  and  bacterial  fermentation,
which add flavor, acidity, and leavening to the dough. There is a sheen to the crumb of
breads  made  with  fully  developed  pre-ferments.  This  shiny  crumb  is  a  visual  sign  of
good bread, and I often look for it before I smell or taste breads.

Straight dough A dough that is made up in a single stage, without
pre-fermented dough or a levain culture.

Levain The French word for “sourdough,” referring to a naturally
leavened dough culture made from just flour and water, containing
billions of active wild yeast cells and naturally occurring bacteria
that  ferment  bread  dough  and  allow  it  to  rise.  For  thousands  of
years  (about  five  thousand,  according  to  most  respected  sources)

humans  have  made  leavened  bread  from  just  flour,  water,  and,
usually, salt, leavened only by the natural yeast in the air and flour,
which work to create a bubbly, fragrant dough.

Pre-ferment A  pre-ferment  is  a  portion  of  the  dough  mixed  up  in
advance, usually six to twelve hours before mixing the final dough.
The recipes in this book that use pre-ferments use either a poolish,
which is wetter and has equal amounts flour and water, or a biga,
which  has  less  water  and  is  stiffer.  Pre-ferments  add  flavor,
leavening, and keeping qualities to the bread.

Biga  The  term  used  in  Italian  baking  for  a  pre-fermented  dough
culture. While there is no strict definition, it typically implies a mix
of a somewhat stiff dough (60 to 70 percent water) made up of just
flour, water, and a very small amount of yeast, which is allowed to
ferment  for  six  to  twelve  hours  before  being  added  to  the  final
dough mix. The biga builds up a lot of flavor-producing gas (carbon
dioxide and alcohol), acids, and bacteria. When it is added to the
final dough mix, the result is bread that captures those flavors in a
very good way.

Poolish  A  word  used  in  French  baking,  the  name  referring  to
techniques  of  Polish  bakers  who  transported  their  methods  to
France. Like the Italian biga, a poolish is a pre-ferment added to the
final dough mix to enhance flavor, in this case with buttery and nutty
notes, and improve keeping due to the acidity that accumulates as
the  poolish  culture  develops,  typically  for  six  to  twelve  hours. A
poolish often contains 30 to 50 percent of the total flour in a recipe
and generally contains equal amounts by weight of flour and water
and a tiny amount of yeast.

When  using  pre-ferments,  it’s  important  to  allow  them  to  develop  fully  but  not
excessively to attain optimum flavor and leavening. Pre-ferments need a minimum of four
hours of development if they are to have a beneficial impact on the bread. When at its
peak, a biga will be bubbly and slightly domed on top and smell strongly of alcohol and
yeast.  An  overdeveloped  biga  will  collapse,  which  is  easy  to  discern.  A  properly
developed poolish  will  be  very  bubbly  on  top,  and  if  you  stare  at  it  you  will
occasionally see bubbles popping when it is at its best. Like a biga, it too will have an
alcohol-yeast smell. An overdeveloped poolish will likewise be visibly collapsed.

Top: Mature biga (left) and poolish (right). Bottom: Comparing the texture of biga (left) and poolish (right).

If you use an underdeveloped biga or poolish, you miss out on the flavor benefits and
also  end  up  with  less  vigorous  fermentation.  The  result  is  a  denser  bread  with  lower
volume and blander taste. On the flip side, overdoing it with fermentation can lead to an
excess of alcohol from fermentation, which will mask the sweet wheat flavors.

The first time you mix one of these pre-ferments, you may be skeptical that such a tiny
amount of yeast will be enough. Just follow the recipes and prepare to be amazed. Even
after all of these years of commercial baking, I still get off on it. My Overnight  Pizza
Dough  with  Poolish  recipe  leavens  enough  dough  for  five  pizzas  with  just  a  scant  ⅛
teaspoon of instant yeast. The tiny amounts of yeast used to start a poolish or a biga are
just the beginning. The yeast and the enzymes in the flour are activated by water, and all
of the yeast cells bud and duplicate quickly and logarithmically until the yeast has fully
populated the poolish or biga. That tiny amount of yeast you began with has expanded an
untold number of times—about a gazillion. It’s so cool.

At my bakery, we have to make seasonal adjustments in the amount of yeast we put in
our pre-fermented doughs because the nighttime temperatures are cooler in winter and

warmer  in  summer.  We  use  less  yeast  when  it’s  warmer,  and  more  yeast  when  it’s
cooler.  Alternatively,  we  could  use  the  same  amount  of  yeast  and  adjust  the  water
temperature up or down for mixing the pre-ferments.

DETAIL 3: USE THE AUTOLYSE METHOD

Every fermented dough in my bakery—be it bread, pizza, croissant, or brioche dough—
uses the autolyse method, where the flour and the liquid in the recipe are mixed and left
to rest for at least 15 minutes, and preferably 20 to 30 minutes, before adding salt, yeast,
levain, or pre-ferments and mixing the final dough. The autolyse allows the flour to more
completely  absorb  the  water  and  also  activates  enzymes  in  the  flour;  for  example,
amylase enzymes break down the complex carbohydrates in the flour into simple sugars
the  yeast  can  feed  on,  and  protease  enzymes  naturally  degrade  the  gluten  forming
proteins, in a way that makes the dough more extensible.

The  term autolysis  was  first  applied  to  this  process  in  the  mid-1970s  by  French
baking icon Professor Raymond Calvel, who developed and promoted the technique. In
his  book Le Goût du Pain,  available  in  English  as The Taste of Bread , Calvel wrote
about  being  driven  to  improve  on  industrial  practices  that  resulted  in  overmixed  and
overoxidized dough. Calvel’s mission was to educate and to restore the quality of French
bread baking, which had been in decline since the 1950s. The autolyse method allowed
for  proper  dough  development  with  a  shorter  mixing  time,  thereby  reducing  oxidation
and improving the flavor of the bread. Overmixing and oxidation aren’t an issue in home
baking,  being  a  by-product  of  mechanical  dough  mixers  and  commercial  methods  to
speed up production. However, the autolyse process is still beneficial for home bakers
because it allows for improved gluten development in hand-mixed doughs, resulting in
better gas retention and better volume in the finished loaf. When hand mixing, you can
feel the difference between a dough that was autolysed and one that wasn’t; autolysed
dough  already  has  some  of  the  structure  that  a  dough  mixed  all  at  once,  without  the
autolyse, doesn’t have until later in its development.

Another  benefit  of  the  autolyse  process  is  that  it  increases  the extensibility  of  the
dough. Extensibility  refers  to  the  dough’s  ability  to  be  stretched  and  hold  its  shape
without being so elastic that it snaps back. This isn’t a big issue for the recipes in this
book  because  all  have  high  hydration  (that  is,  a  lot  of  water),  which  creates  a  slack
dough that is fully extensible. But this benefit is very useful for bakeries that work with
stiffer doughs. Imagine trying to shape a couple hundred baguettes from an elastic dough
within a fixed period of time—it’s a nightmare! Bread doughs mixed with high-gluten
flour tend to be more elastic too, and therefore also benefit from the autolyse.

While  I  advocate  autolysing  in  the  traditional  manner  described  by  Calvel,  fairly

recent developments in the manufacturing of instant dried yeast have led some people to
recommend that when instant dried yeast is used in a recipe, it should be included in the
autolyse. The benefit is that the yeast will be fully hydrated by the time the final dough
mix takes place, resulting in a more vigorous fermentation. If you try this, don’t autolyse
for  more  than  about  20  minutes.  Once  activated,  yeast  in  dough  that  has  no  salt  will
reproduce very quickly, and you’ll lose the flavor benefits of long, slow fermentation.

DETAIL 4: MIX A WET, SLACK DOUGH

There are opposing points of view on how wet doughs should be. I prefer the flavor and
texture of breads and pizza doughs made with more water than is typical. I am by no
means alone in this. Many good bakers feel the same, including most of those I learned
from. My experience is that including a little more water in the dough, say 75 percent
instead of 70 percent hydration, results in more gas production, and if fermentation isn’t
rushed, those gases provide a lot of flavor. However, these wetter doughs are very slack
and need some help building up their physical shape so they don’t fall flat. They are also
stickier and a little trickier to handle than stiffer doughs.

There is a property of bread dough called strength that refers to a dough’s ability to
hold its form. When dumped onto a baker’s bench or kitchen counter, a dough that has
sufficient  strength  will  retain  its  vertical  height.  It  will  also  have  tenacity  and  some
elasticity.  On  the  other  hand,  a  wet,  sticky  dough  with  little  strength  will  relax  and
collapse like a batter, and it won’t hold its shape when you try to form it into a loaf. All
of this is to say that stiffer doughs hold their shape better than wet doughs.

But  there’s  a  catch:  wet  doughs  encourage  gas  production  and  flavor  development
from fermentation more than stiff doughs, which results in more flavorful breads. When
properly  made,  they  can  also  contribute  a  lighter  texture  with  some  big  holes.  By
comparison,  dense  bread  comes  from  a  stiff  dough.  Therefore,  the  question  is  how  to
develop a wet dough that has enough strength to hold its form and hold on to fermentation
gases.  While  some  bakers  use ascorbic  acid  (vitamin  C)  in  very  small  amounts
(measured in parts per million), to add strength to their doughs, I prefer to accomplish
this by applying folds (see sidebar,). That way I can give the dough only as much strength
as it needs, making a judgment call about how often to fold depending on how loose or
tight the dough is as it’s fermenting.

One of my favorite parts of the occasional baking class that I teach is hand mixing a
super wet dough made with white flour and hydrated to 80 percent. It looks nothing like a
bread dough and seems more like a batter. I pass the dough bucket around the room so
everyone can see the texture. Invariably, everyone says that if their final mix looked like
this, they would assume they had made a mistake and pitch the entire mass or add flour. I

then  proceed to  demonstrate  that  with  just  a  few  folds  over  the  course  of  the  next  30
minutes,  the  dough  comes  together  and  starts  to  look  like  bread  dough,  albeit  a  very
sticky dough that must be handled at this stage with wet hands.

WHAT IS FOLDING?

One  way  to  strengthen  wet,  high-hydration  doughs  is  by  applying  folds.  Briefly,
folding involves pulling segments of the dough over the dough mass one at a time,
stretching each to the point of resistance and no further, then folding it back over the
top of the dough. Doing this several times during the bulk fermentation of the dough
helps  organize  the  dough’s  gluten network,  which  allows  it  to  hold  on  to  gases
produced as the dough ferments. (For more on folding,) The more complexly knit
this network of gluten becomes, the more strength the dough has.

In  a  commercial  bakery,  much  of  this  gluten  organization  occurs  in  the  mixer.
Longer mixing at higher speeds develops the dough more intensively. In the process,
the  proteins  that  make  up  gluten  are  repeatedly  stretched  and  folded  over  upon
themselves to create a three-dimensional fabric that gives the dough tensile strength.
These doughs can be fermented faster, which is great for getting more product out
the door faster, but not good for flavor and quality. Less intensive mixing organizes
the gluten network less aggressively. To compensate, good bakers apply folds to the
dough during bulk fermentation.

When do we apply the folds? Because the structure of the gluten network needs to
be in place to prevent this gas from escaping, most of the folds should be applied in
the early stages of bulk fermentation. Gas buildup in the dough also contributes to
its  strength,  as  the  gas  expands  and  stretches  the  web  within  the  gluten  network.
Folding allows the dough to capture as much of the gas as possible. That said, it
isn’t unreasonable to give a very slack dough one last fold an hour prior to dividing
and shaping. Although the recipes in this book, which have five hours or more of
fermentation time, offer a lot of flexibility in when to apply the folds, I recommend
applying the first fold 10 minutes or so after the final mix is done. Each successive
fold can occur anytime after the dough has completely relaxed from the previous
fold.

How many folds does the dough need? This depends on how wet and slack it was

when mixed. Wet doughs get very little gluten development during the hand mixing,
so they need three or four folds during the first hour or two of fermentation to give
the gluten network enough structure to create a light crumb texture in the bread.

The  recipes  in  this  book  each  give  guidance  on  the  timing  and  number  of  folds
recommended, usually specifying a range, such as three to four folds. However, I
don’t want to be overly hard and fast with rules about this. When working with your
dough, you’ll be able to see the physical change after you’ve folded it. If, based on
what you observe, you want to give it one more fold, go ahead and do it.

Wet  dough  The  world  of American  artisan  baking  lacks  specific
definitions for many terms. When I think of a wet or high-hydration
dough,  I  think  of  dough  that  is  naturally  slack  and  needs  folds  to
give  it  appropriate  strength.  Wet  dough  can’t  be  defined  by
hydration  percentage  because  it  depends  on  the  flour  or  blend  of
flours in the recipe. If all white flour is used, 75 percent hydration
would  probably  result  in  a  wet,  somewhat  slack  dough,  and  80
percent would definitely be considered a high-hydration dough. But
if  mostly  whole  wheat  flour  is  used,  75  percent  hydration  would

result in a much stiffer dough, because whole wheat flour absorbs
more water than white flour. For a mostly whole wheat dough to be
considered wet, it would probably need to have at least 82 percent
hydration. Another  interesting  point  is  that American  wheat  flour
holds  more  water  and  has  a  different  quality  of  gluten-forming
proteins  than  that  used  by  French  and  Italian  bakers.  (I  haven’t
worked  with  German  or  other  European  flours,  so  I  can’t
extrapolate  further.)  The  net  result  is  that  a  wet  dough  in  France
would  probably  contain  about  5  percent  less  water  than  an
American high-hydration dough.

Pain de Campagne dough, 78% hydration, ready for its first fold.

Of course, using high-hydration, slack dough is only one of the secrets to making good
bread with a light crumb and big open holes. You still need to allow the dough to ferment
completely, both in bulk and after it is shaped. If you bake it too soon, it will be too
dense.

DETAIL 5: ALLOW FOR COMPLETE BULK
FERMENTATION

The careful reader may notice that many of the recipes in this book call for the dough to
expand beyond the oft-repeated “until doubled in size.” Tripled in size is more common

here. The amount of expansion depends on the dough. Wet doughs create more gas and
therefore expand more than stiff doughs. Maximum flavor development requires allowing
enough  time  for  all  of  the  desired  biochemical  reactions  to  take  place.  Every  recipe
operates on its own ideal timeline. Make sure you give the first rise, or bulk fermentation
stage, enough time. Rush it and you lose.

DETAIL 6: HANDLE DOUGH GENTLY

Most home bakers think of kneading dough as a physical act, and the harder you work the
dough, the better it is going to be. We don’t do that here. Once the final dough is mixed,
treat  it  gently.  Being  gentle  with  the  dough  will  help  preserve  its  gluten  structure  and
retain  its  gas.  This  applies  throughout:  when  folding,  easing  the  dough  out  of  the  tub,
dividing it, shaping it, removing it from proofing baskets, and placing the proofed loaf in
the Dutch oven for baking.

When folding the dough, extend the sections only until you feel resistance, and never to
the point of tearing it. When turning the dough out of the tub and onto a floured work
surface for dividing and shaping, toss some flour around the edges of the tub, then work a
floured hand beneath the dough and gently ease it out onto the work surface.

At my bakery, we don’t punch down the dough before dividing and shaping. I prefer to
keep the gas, along with all of its flavor compounds, in the dough. To divide the dough,
always flour the surface along the dividing line first, then cut it with a dough knife or
other sharp edge—even the end of a wide metal spatula. Tearing it breaks up more of the
gluten than necessary. And when shaping, avoid overstretching the dough so you don’t
run the risk of visibly tearing it. Using sufficient flour to dust the proofing baskets should
prevent sticking, but if loaves do stick, be gentle as you ease them out of the baskets.
Even when transferring proofed loaves to the preheated Dutch oven, continue to handle
them carefully. I use the sides of my hands, rather than my fingertips, to lift the loaves;
this spreads the pressure over a broader area.

DETAIL 7: PROOF PERFECTLY TO POINT

After the dough has been shaped into loaves, it undergoes one final rise, called proofing.
This  can  take  anywhere  from  one  to  sixteen  hours,  depending  on  the  dough  and  the
ambient  temperature.  Just  as  you  can  slow  a  dough’s  development  during  bulk
fermentation  by  putting  it  in  a  refrigerator  or  retarder,  you  can  chill  shaped  loaves  to
prolong  the  proofing  process.  Slowing  the  rise  during  either  bulk  fermentation  or
proofing (but not both) is critical to achieving the complexity of flavors we look for in
the  breads  at  Ken’s  Artisan  Bakery.  It  also  helps  us  manage  our  schedule  and  bake
previously shaped loaves as soon as we get into the bakery in the early morning.

It’s  usually  difficult  for  home  bakers  to  put  bulk  dough in  the  refrigerator  overnight
because of the size of the 12-quart dough tubs I call for in this book. It’s easier to put
shaped loaves of bread in the refrigerator, so in this book, doughs are chilled only at the
proofing stage. Not only do you get improved flavor and better keeping quality from the
acidity that develops, but this overnight proof schedule also gives you the chance to bake
bread first thing in the morning. It’s a great way to start your day.

The timing works this way: mix the dough in the afternoon, do the bulk fermentation at
room temperature following the recipe timing (usually around five hours), and then shape
the  loaves  in  the  evening. As  soon  as  they’re  shaped,  wrap  them  to  keep  them  from
drying out, then put them the refrigerator. The chilled loaves don’t need to be warmed to
room  temperature  before  baking  then  next  morning.  I  bake  them  straight  from  the
refrigerator.

It’s also essential to find the perfect proof point. Don’t overproof or underproof your
bread. The finger-dent test, described in detail, is a good indicator here. You’ll know the
loaves  are  optimally  proofed  if  you  poke  them  and  the  indentation  springs  back  very

slowly. You can use this test while the loaves are still in their proofing baskets. If the
dough collapses as you remove it from the proofing basket, it has gone too far and won’t
have  as  much  baked  volume  as  it  would  have  if  you  had  removed  it  earlier.  Levain
breads have a longer window of time during which they are optimally proofed because
their fermentation is less vigorous and they evolve more slowly, and perhaps because
they  have  more  acidity.  Doughs  made  with  commercial  yeast  have  a  shorter  window,
sometimes as narrow as 10 to 15 minutes.

TESTING THE LIMITS

Ultimately, I want to find out what the limits are for every bread I make. At what
point is it overproofed? When the physical structure of the gluten breaks down and
can no longer hold the gas, that is when it collapses. Then, the next time I make that
dough,  I  stop  just  prior  that  point.  I  go  through  the  same  process  with  bulk
fermentation, exploring what combinations of time and temperature are too much.
What’s too much? I don’t know, let’s give it some more time tomorrow and see
what happens. It’s really the process of finding the limits at each stage that make all
the  difference  in  the  final  bread.  It’s  something  you  can  only  figure  out  with
repetition  and  by  paying  attention  to  what  happens  when  variables  change.  I’ve
found that my best breads come from finding the limits and then pulling back a bit—
just enough. Not too much.

DETAIL 8: BAKE UNTIL DARK BROWN

The  goal  in  baking  any  bread  is  to  achieve  maximum  oven  spring,  ideal  flavor  and
texture of the crust, and complete baking of the interior. I like the crust to be thin and
crisp with some pliability to it. If the oven is too hot, the crust will be completely baked
before  the  middle  is  done.  If  the  oven  is  too  cool,  the  crust  will  be  thicker  and  less
delicate.  The character  of  the  crust  also  depends  on  the  type  of  bread.  The  crust  of  a
levain  bread  is  naturally  toothier  than  the  crust  of  a  baguette.  Getting  the  ideal  crust
depends on full fermentation, proper oven temperature, the proper amount of steam, and
not pulling the bread out of the oven too soon.

Baking  bread in Dutch ovens, as recommended here, allows the bread to provide its
own steam as it releases moisture into its enclosed chamber during the baking. Learning
how your oven bakes is essential. Most home ovens aren’t well calibrated, so the actual

temperature is often different from what you set. Use an inexpensive oven thermometer to
learn what temperature setting delivers 475°F, for example. Most of the bread recipes in
this book direct you to bake for 30 minutes with the Dutch oven’s lid on, then another 20
minutes or so with the lid off. If your loaf is done in 30 minutes, your oven is too hot; if it
takes an hour, your oven is not hot enough. It’s best to bake bread on a rack in the middle
of the oven; too low and the bottom of the loaves may scorch, since many home ovens
are hottest at the bottom.

In addition to a thin, crisp crust, I like well-baked loaves, well beyond the blond stage
throughout  the  loaf  to  dark  brown  and  ochre  colors  throughout  the  crust.  The  point  of
baking until the crust is dark is to get a caramelized complexity of flavor that permeates
subtly into the crumb of the bread. Many bakers know the term Maillard reaction—the
chemical  process  that  results  in  dark  coloration  during  baking,  along  with  the  unique
flavors and aromas that arise as a result. The Maillard reaction occurs not just in a well-
baked bread crust, but in the crust of browned meats and other foods too.

TROUBLESHOOTING

When  a  bread  at  my  bakery  doesn’t  come  out  just  right,  I  ask  myself  a  number  of
questions to try to understand what went wrong and how to adjust so the problem doesn’t
recur. This is a normal part of life for every good baker. Over time things change and
adjustments  need  to  be  made.  And  no  matter  how  good  the  bread,  I  may  ask  these
questions to see if we can improve upon it:

  • Dough temperature: What temperature was the dough at the end of the mix? Is that

the target mix temperature for that dough?

  • Time of bulk fermentation: How long did it take for the dough to expand to the size

indicated in the recipe? Was this period too long or too short?

  • Folds: Did the dough get enough folding?
  • Room temperature: Colder or warmer than usual?
  • Condition of the pre-ferment: At the time the dough was mixed, was the pre-ferment

(poolish, biga, levain, etc.), underdeveloped, overdeveloped, or just right?
  • Dough strength and hydration: Did the dough feel right? Did it have its usual

volume and gas? Was it too sticky or too stiff?

  • Scaling: Any possibility that a measurement error occurred? For predictable results

you need to measure each ingredient accurately, especially salt and yeast. Keep in
mind that for home baking, small amounts of yeast (1 to 2 grams, for example)
require either a very accurate scale or conversion to a volume measurement (for
example, teaspoons), as given in the recipes.

  • Complete proof: Was the bread underproofed or overproofed?
  • Proper baking: Was the oven temperature correct? Was there the right amount of

steam? Was the baking time adequate?

  • Flour: Was it a new flour? Even the same brand and variety of flour purchased

from the same place can vary depending on harvest, weather, milling date, and other
factors. Some flours produce slower or faster fermentation, and some flours absorb
more or less water, which necessitates slight changes in the amount of water in a
recipe.

GUIDING PRINCIPLES

Here’s  a  summary  of  guiding  principles  to  help  ensure  success  in  creating  high-
quality artisan breads at home.

– Think of time and temperature as ingredients and keep in mind that they have a

reciprocal relationship.

– Use a scale to measure all ingredients by weight (the exception being small
quantities of yeast, where teaspoon measures are probably more accurate).

– Use the autolyse process before mixing the final dough.
– Use a thermometer to check the temperature of the dough and learn to hit the

ideal temperature consistently at the end of the mix.

– Use more water in the dough than conventional recipes allow.

– Learn to handle sticky dough.
– Apply folds to the dough to give it the strength wet doughs need to hold their

form.

– Push the fermentation to just shy of its limits to get the best flavors.
– Bake the bread until it’s a deep, dark brown.
– Keep a log of dough temperatures, fermentation times, and other details to help

– Retard levain loaves after shaping for at least twelve hours, or use a very long,

you fine-tune your process.

overnight bulk dough fermentation.

A NOTE ON BAKER’S PERCENTAGES

When  I  was  studying  with Jean-Marc Berthomier at l’Institut  Paul  Bocuse  many  years
ago,  I  was  impressed  by  his  ability  to  instantly  recite  the  formulas  for  many  different
breads.  One  of  the  first  basics  a  French  baker  learns  is  baker’s  percentages,  and  this
knowledge provides a critical foundation for understanding recipes.

All of Jean-Marc’s recipes begin with 1 kilogram, or 1,000 grams, of flour, which is
the standard recipe basis in French baking. Each of his bread recipes is a variation on a
simple  formula:  1,000  grams  of  flour,  680  grams  of  water,  20  grams  of  salt,  and  20
grams of fresh yeast. In baker’s percentages, that can be stated as 100 percent flour, 68
percent water, 2 percent salt, and 2 percent fresh yeast. (Note that 3 grams of fresh yeast
equals 1 gram of instant yeast, so this would equate to about 7 grams of instant yeast.) In
general, all of these breads autolyse for 20 minutes, have a final mix temperature of 75°F
(24°C), are fermented at room temperature for 1½ hours, and are shaped and proofed for
1 hour before baking. What often differentiates the recipes is the type of flour used, slight
variations in the amount of water, and the shape of the loaf.

Because  larger  or  smaller  batches  can  be  made  using  the  same  ratios,  Jean-Marc
could double, halve, or quintuple a bread formula and expect to get the same results. The
ratios of the ingredients as measured by weight thankfully remain the same, regardless of
batch size.

Understanding a recipe begins with a grasp of the ratios of the ingredients as measured
by weight. This was the point of bringing up Jean-Marc’s flour, water, salt, and yeast
ratios.  If  someone  describes  a  dough  as  being  made  with  solely  white  flour  and  70
percent water, I immediately know from experience what that dough will look like and
feel like. The math is easiest when using metric weights. (What’s 2 percent of 3 pounds,
5  ounces? Silence.  What’s  2  percent  of  1,500  grams? Thirty grams.) You  can  indeed

follow the recipes here without doing any math, but having a basic awareness of baker’s
percentages  will  allow  you  to  experiment  with  different  flour  mixes,  knowledgeably
adjust water in the dough if your flour is more or less absorbent, and simply understand
what you are doing.

UNDERSTANDING BAKER’S PERCENTAGES

With baker’s percentages, all ingredients in a recipe are stated as percentages of the
total  flour  weight.  The  total  amount  of  flour  is  always  100  percent  (including  a
combination  of  flours).  If  the  amount  of  flour  in  a  recipe  is  1,000  grams  and  the
amount  of  water  is  700  grams,  water  makes  up  70  percent  of  the  flour  weight.
Likewise, 20 grams of salt in this recipe is 2 percent of the flour weight, and 20
grams of yeast is the same. So this simple recipe could be expressed as 100 percent
70  percent  water,  2  percent  salt,  and  2  percent  yeast.  This  allows  recipes  to  be
scaled  up  or  down  easily:  whatever  the  flour  weight,  the  other  ingredients  can
simply be measured as the expressed percentage of the flour weight, whether the
amount of flour is 500 grams or 5,000 grams. Each bread and pizza dough recipe in
this  book  provides  baker’s  percentages  in  addition  to  specific  amounts  of  each
ingredient.

You’ll note that the volume conversions included in each ingredients table do not
correspond  to  the  baker’s  percentage  column.  This  is  because  the volume
conversions are necessarily imprecise. If you are interested in scaling these recipes
using  baker’s  percentages,  you  should  absolutely  measure  your  ingredients  by
weight  rather  than  volume.  After  all,  what  is  70  percent  of  2¾  cups  of  flour?
Wouldn’t it be easier to just buy a kitchen scale?

COMPARING RECIPES

Manipulating any single detail covered in this chapter can have a significant impact on
the final bread, and in fact, many of the differences among breads lie less in ingredients
than in these techniques and in whether or how they are applied. This is often reflected in
recipes, so knowing how to compare recipes has a very practical use. When I look at a
recipe, a number of questions spring to mind: “How is this different from other recipes I

already  know?  What  blend  of  flours  is  used?  What  type  of  leavening  and  how  much?
What  is  the  hydration  percentage?  What  temperature  of  water  is  used?  Is  this  a  novel
way  to  ferment  the  dough?  What  temperatures  are  specified  for  dough  mix,  bulk
fermentation, and proofing? And how long does the dough develop?”

Two recipes that look alike can in fact be quite different. Always consider the balance
between  the  amount  of  leavening,  dough  temperature,  and  fermentation  time  when
evaluating 
the  warm-dough-less-yeast/cold-dough-more-yeast
seesaw?

recipes.  Remember 

To  illustrate,  consider  my  recipe  for Overnight  White  Bread.  On  the  surface,  this
recipe looks very similar to Jim Lahey’s famous no-knead bread recipe. But let’s take a
deeper  look.  This  comparison  isn’t  about  which  method  or  bread  is  better;  it’s  just
interesting because at a quick glance these recipes look very much the same: an easy, no-
fuss mix of a soft dough with a small amount of yeast in the evening; shaping into loaves
the next morning; and baking in a Dutch oven an hour or two later. However, when you
compare  our  ingredient  ratios  using  baker’s  percentages,  or  when  you  compare  the
specified water temperatures, it’s easy to see the differences. In terms of ingredients, my
recipe uses only one-third the amount of yeast; it also has 3 percent more water, and the
water  temperature  is  at  least  30°F  (about  16°C)  warmer,  resulting  in  a  final  mix
temperature that’s about 18°F (10°C) warmer. As for differences in technique, I call for
an autolyse period and I specify applying two folds, preferably in the first hour and a
half after mixing the dough. My recipe takes a little bit more work, but not much.

I  write  this  comparison  to  Mr.  Lahey’s  well-known  bread  recipe  to  show  that  the
differences  between  recipes  are  easiest  to  see  and  understand  when  you  compare
recipes’ baker’s percentages, temperatures, and timelines. Seeing that my bread, which
is made on the same schedule, uses one-third the amount of yeast and is mixed with much
warmer water is a great illustration of the relationship between the amount of leavening
and the temperature of the dough. My dough benefits from a few folds to give it strength.
My  recipe  reflects  my  personal  preference  for  the  flavors  developed  in  warm,  wet
doughs made with less yeast.

CHAPTER 3
EQUIPMENT AND INGREDIENTS

B

oth the equipment and the ingredients called for in this book are very straightforward.
You probably already have most or all of the ingredients you need, and if you don’t,
they’re easy to obtain. In terms of equipment, I do call for a few things you may not
have, so let’s take a look at those first. Then, if you need to purchase any equipment,

you can go ahead and get started on that.

EQUIPMENT

You’ll need just a few special tools or other pieces of kitchen equipment to make the
recipes in this book. You may already have some of it on hand. Any you don’t have will
be readily available online or at a kitchen supply or restaurant supply store. All of the
recipes in this book call for mixing the dough by hand, so you don’t need a stand mixer.

Dough Tub

You’ll need a 12-quart round tub with a lid for mixing your dough by hand and to hold
the  dough  as  it  rises.  I  recommend  Cambro  brand  translucent  polycarbonate tubs;  the
model number is RFSCW12. These tubs are available online from Amazon and at most
restaurant supply stores that sell to the public.

If you choose another brand, that’s fine; just be sure it’s a food-grade container. What
is important is the size; it needs to be big enough to allow you to mix and fold the dough
by hand within the container and to contain the dough as it expands. The round shape
makes it easy to incorporate the ingredients, whereas squared edges and corners tend to
trap  ingredients. A  clear  container  is  best  because  you  can  see  through  it  to  chart  the
progress  of  the  rise. And  of  course  you  need  a  lid  to  keep  the  dough  from  drying  out
during its long rise.

The  advantage  to  using  a  big,  12-quart  tub  is  that  you  can  do  everything  inside  it:
weighing, mixing, and folding the dough. There isn’t any need to dump the dough onto
your countertop until the final stage, when you divide and shape the loaves. Using the
tub streamlines the process and makes it easy. I’ve found that these 12-quart tubs have
other uses too. I use mine for brining chicken or turkey, or sometimes as an ice bucket for
beer or wine.

If  you  have  something  around  the  house  that  approximates  the  same  size  and  shape
(round, about 10 inches in diameter, and about 8 inches deep, with a lid), give it a try.
Although smaller tubs are available, it’s difficult to mix the dough by hand in them, and
impossible to fold the dough without removing it from the tub first.

Smaller Tubs

You’ll need one or two 6-quart rounded tubs with lids for holding your levain culture
and for making poolish or biga. Again, I recommend the clear Cambro tubs, which are
available wherever the 12-quart tubs are sold. You will only need two of these if you
plan to make a poolish or biga while you already have a levain culture going. In testing
recipes for this book I only ever needed one at a time.

Dutch Oven

All of the breads in this book are baked in a 4-quart Dutch oven with a lid. Baking the
bread in a preheated Dutch oven allows you to make fantastic bread at home that looks
like  it  came  from  a  great  bakery.  While  most  Dutch  ovens  are  heatproof  to  500°F
(260°C),  some  brands,  such  as  Le  Creuset,  have  knobs  that  may  melt  at  high

temperatures. You can replace these knobs with either a metal Le Creuset replacement
knob or an inexpensive steel cabinet pull from the hardware store.

Lodge Cast Iron and Emile Henry are two well-known, less expensive, good-quality
brands,  and  that’s  what  I  used  to  test  all  of  the  recipes  in  this  book  (and  both  have
ovenproof knobs). If you already have a suitable Dutch oven but aren’t sure what size it
is, just measure water into it in quarts to figure out its capacity. Mine are 10 inches in
diameter  at  the  top  and  4  inches  deep.  If  you  have  a  5-quart  Dutch  oven,  it  will  also
work. The dough will spread out more than in a 4-quart Dutch oven, and therefore the
loaves will be a bit wider and not quite as tall as those in the photos in this book. Breads
baked in a 5-quart Dutch oven may not split open on top in the same way as those baked
in a 4-quart model, since there will be less vertical pressure as the loaves get their oven
spring.  But  you’ll  still  get  good  bread,  so  why  not  take  advantage  of  equipment  you
already have? By the way, all of the recipes in this book make two loaves of bread, so if
you have two Dutch ovens you can bake both loaves at once. Otherwise, you’ll have to
bake your bread in two stages.

Digital Kitchen Scale

I  cannot  overemphasize  the  importance  of  measuring  bread  ingredients  by  weight,  not
volume. (See Here for more on the advantages of baking by weight.) Therefore, a digital
kitchen  scale  is  essential.  It  should  measure  up  to  2  kilograms  (4.4  pounds)  and  be
accurate  to  single  grams. Also  take  into  account  that  you  need  to  be  able  to  read  the
display when a large, 12-quart tub is resting on top of it (this allows you to measure
water and flour directly into the tub). If you can’t see the display when you put the dough
tub on the scale, you can measure out the flour and water into smaller containers and
pour them into your 12-quart dough bucket. A scale that measures down to tenths of a
gram would be handy for accurately measuring yeast, but that feature isn’t essential, as I
also provide teaspoon measures for yeast.

One brand I recommend is Oxo. They make a scale with a convenient pull-out display,
and that’s what I used for testing all the recipes in this book. It is available at Amazon
and kitchen supply stores. You can buy a decent scale for under $25.

Instant-Read Probe Thermometer

An  instant-read  probe  thermometer  is  essential  for  making  sure  you’re  using  the  right
temperature of water and measuring the final mix temperature, and it will come in handy
in other ways too. Mine gets repeated use measuring the temperature of meat as it cooks.
Taylor and CDN are two brands I can recommend. Both make models that cost less than

$20.

Proofing Baskets

Proofing  baskets  are  used  to  hold  shaped  loaves  as  they  proof,  or  undergo  their  final
rise. Because all of the loaves in this book are baked in 4-quart Dutch ovens, you’ll only
need one size of proofing basket: 9 inches in diameter at the top and 3½ inches deep—or
whatever  diameter  matches  the  shape  of  your  Dutch  oven.  If  you  can  afford  cane
banneton baskets, they will last a lifetime. Linen-lined proofing baskets are also a great
choice.  The  recipes  in  this  book  were  tested  with  Frieling  baskets.  Matfer  is  another
respected  brand.  You  can  also  improvise  a  proofing  basket  using  a  bowl  of
approximately the same dimensions lined with a flour-dusted, lint-free tea towel.

Odds and Ends

You’ll obviously want a pair of oven mitts for dealing with hot Dutch ovens. Make sure
the mitts you buy are safe for handling a 500°F (260°C) pot. An oven thermometer also
comes in handy, since home ovens rarely deliver the exact temperature you dial in. Mine
runs  about  25°F  cooler,  so  when  I  set  it  to  500°F,  I  actually  get  475°F.  Because  the
quantities of yeast called for in these recipes are typically quite small, it’s difficult to
measure them accurately with a scale. In a few cases, you’ll get the most accurate results
if you have a 1/16 teaspoon measure. These are available (including online at Amazon),
so I recommend you purchase one. Finally, you’ll need something to cover the proofing
baskets after you have shaped the loaves. Tea towels work fine for this, although I like to
use  nonperforated  plastic  bags,  which  allow  you  to  proof  the  loaves  overnight  in  the
refrigerator without drying them out. I reuse clean bags I get at the produce section of the
market for this purpose.

Pizza Equipment

There  are  several  ways  to  make  great  pizza  at  home,  and  I  describe  a  few  of  these
methods in chapter 12. A pizza stone works best; they are widely available and usually
cost around $30. If you’re using a pizza stone, you’ll also want a pizza peel to help you
scoot the pizza into the hot oven as quickly (and painlessly) as possible. I prefer wood
peels; a 14-inch diameter should be the right size for your home oven.

If you don’t feel like investing in a pizza stone or peel but do want to try some of the
pizza recipes in this book, you can make thicker-crust pizzas in a medium-sized oven-

proof skillet. I’ve had great results cooking pizza in my 9-inch cast-iron skillet.

INGREDIENTS

The focus of this book is making great bread and pizza dough from just four ingredients:
flour,  water,  salt,  and  yeast.  There  are  plenty  of  wonderful  breads  that  include  nuts,
whole grains, dried fruits, milk, butter, herbs, or cheese (I have had a great pain Gruyère
at Boulangerie Onfroy, in Paris). But in my mind, the real craft of artisan bread baking
lies in producing something exquisite with only the four principal ingredients. Of course,
if you’re using only a few ingredients, quality is paramount, so let’s take a look at these
four basic ingredients and some of the considerations in regard to each.

Flour

First, note that because temperature is such an important element of the equation when
making  bread,  you  should  use  flour at  room  temperature  for  all  of  the  recipes  in  this
book. Beyond that, my recommendations on flour come down to this: Use the best-quality
flour you can find, assessing its quality by both the appearance and the taste of the bread,
and  seek  out  flour  with  protein  in  the  11  to  12  percent  range.  Unfortunately,  protein
content is rarely detailed on flour packaging, but some brands do put this information on
their websites. These lower-protein flours have more in common with the flour used in
French  and  Italian  artisan  bakeries,  and  they  tolerate  a  long  rise  well  and  produce  a
crumb that is delicate and easy to digest. They also produce dough that ends up less tight
and  more  pliable,  resulting  in  bread  with  a  nice  open  crumb  and  a  crust  that  blooms
nicely during baking.

Typically, flours labeled “bread flour” have a high protein content—generally about
14 percent. By contrast, flour labeled “all-purpose,” such as King Arthur Organic All-
Purpose  Flour,  with  an  11.8  percent  protein  content,  is,  in  their  words,  “ideal  for
European-style  hearth breads,”  and  I  agree.  At  my  bakery  and  pizzeria,  we  use
Shepherd’s Grain Low-Gluten flour as our white flour for breads and pizza dough (see
the essay for more on Shepherd’s Grain). Its protein content is about 11 percent. Try a
variety of flours to see which you prefer.

From left: Whole wheat, all-purpose (white), and whole rye flours.

I also recommend using unbleached flour that has a creamy color. Bleaching is a flour
treatment  that  removes  carotenoid  pigments  and  literally  whitens  the  flour—removing
flavor in the process. This reflects a mass market preference for whiteness over a more
natural product with better flavor.

WHEAT FLOUR

Flour is what you get when wheat kernels, also called wheat berries, are ground
into a meal. The kernel has three components, which are separated in the modern
milling process.

– Endosperm: Made up of starch and protein, the endosperm comprises 84

percent of the wheat berry.

– Bran: Making up about 13 percent of the weight of the wheat berry, bran is the

outer layer of the kernel; it surrounds and protects the endosperm and germ.
Bran contains insoluble fiber and most of the mineral content of the kernel.

– Germ: The component of the kernel that contains the wheat’s genetic material,
the germ makes up about 3 percent of the weight of the kernel. It contains all of
the fat and plenty of flavor.

Whole wheat flour is meal made from the entire wheat berry. White flour is just the
endosperm.  I  don’t  understand  why  people  say  “wheat  bread”  to  refer  to  whole
wheat. White bread is made from wheat flour too. To add to the confusion, there is
also white whole wheat flour, which is a whole grain flour made from white spring
wheat. (Most bread flours are made from red winter wheat.) White whole wheat
flour  has  nutritional  benefits  similar  to  those  of  regular  whole  wheat  flour  but  a
milder flavor.

TRADITIONAL FLOUR PRODUCTION

In  the  old  days,  meaning  the  five  thousand  years  preceding  the  nineteenth  century,
harvested wheat was manually threshed to separate the wheat berries from the stalks and
chaff, then the wheat was ground manually or stone milled. Hard work! Stone milling,
whether powered by muscles, wind, or water, produced a whole grain meal. Sometimes
bolting screens or sieves were used to sift out some or most of the bran. What remained
was flour that had the components of white flour (the endosperm), plus the ground-up
germ, and minus some or most of the bran.

I bring this up because one of my original goals as a baker was to produce a country
bread  that  mimicked  the  best  qualities  of  what Steven  Kaplan  referred  to  as pain
d’autrefois, or bread made the old way, in his book The Bakers of Paris and the Bread
Question,  1700–1775.  This  is  the  kind  of  bread  Poilâne  and  my  other  baking  heroes
were producing in Paris, using flour from artisan mills such as the famed Decollogne-
Lecocq  mill  in  Précy-sur-Marne:  stone-ground  and  sifted  flour  containing  the  germ  in
addition to the white endosperm, with a creamy caramel color. Although we don’t have
mills like that in the United States, I learned from Chad Robertson  to  approximate  the
character  of  the  old-school  French  country  bread  of  my  dreams  by  blending  a  small
amount of whole wheat flour or ground wheat germ in with white flour and using a sweet
levain and long, slow fermentation.

THE ROLE OF GLUTEN AND ENZYMES

The main reason wheat flour produces such excellent bread is the presence of proteins
that produce gluten. Other members of the wheat family, such as spelt and kamut, also
contain  gluten,  as  do  rye,  barley,  and  triticale  (a  hybrid  of  wheat  and  rye).  Wheat
produces a greater amount of gluten than rye and barley, allowing it to hold more gas,
and as a result, wheat produces a lighter, airier bread.

Another critical component in both wheat and rye is the enzyme amylase. When water
is added to these flours, the amylase is activated and begins its work of breaking down
complex sugars in the endosperm into simple sugars that yeast can feed on. The yeast
multiply and eventually produce gases, and the gases are contained by the gluten network
formed by the proteins, allowing the bread to rise. Without the special proteins that form
gluten (glutenin and gliadin) and the enzymes present in wheat and rye, we would all be
eating crackers. Although it isn’t necessary to have this information in your head when
you set out to make bread, it is fascinating to know how the makeup of wheat and rye
allows us to have leavened bread.

Gluten A combination of two proteins that occur in flour: glutenin
and  gliadin.  When  water  and  flour  are  mixed  together  to  make
dough,  gluten  is  formed  as  a  web  of  interlocking  strands  of  these
proteins. The water allows the gluten strands to stretch, and mixing
and folding the dough allow the strands to elongate and organize in
a way that increases their ability to capture the gases produced by
fermentation.  Gluten  expands  and  holds  the  gases  that  contribute
flavors to bread and make the dough rise. Increased complexity in
the organization of the gluten strands also adds to their resilience, a
characteristic bakers call strength.

Water

Use water that is good enough to drink. The critical factor here is water temperature,
which is covered in detail throughout the book.

Salt

When baking, use either sea salt or mined salt. Kosher salt is fine, but the size of kosher
salt flakes means they will take longer to dissolve than fine sea salt. Avoid iodized salt

because iodine inhibits fermentation and tastes like … iodine. Since the grain size of salt
varies from source to source, volume measurements tend to be inconsistent. Therefore
it’s far better to weigh your salt. I recommend using fine sea salt because it will dissolve
quickly  in  the  dough. At  home,  sometimes  I  run  coarse  sea  salt  through  a  coffee  mill
before using it in a hand-mixed bread dough. If you do this, be sure to wipe all of the salt
residue out of the grinder so it doesn’t corrode.

Salt slows the fermentation of bread dough. The salt-free breads of Italy are famous
for their fast rise time (and their bland flavor). The standard amount of salt in recipes for
French  bread  is  2  percent  of  the  weight  of  the  flour.  The  generally  accepted  range  is
between 1.8 and 2.2 percent. I sometimes put 2.2 percent in to get the flavors I like and
for the bit of added strength salt can add to high-hydration doughs.

Baker’s Yeast

All of the recipes in this book call for instant dried yeast. You’re likely to find two or
three kinds of yeast at the store: active dry, rapid-rise, and instant yeast. All of these
yeasts are the same species: Saccharomyces cerevisiae. What differentiates them is their
coating, the way the yeast is manufactured, and performance. At my bakery, we use SAF
Red Instant Yeast. I recommend that you buy a 16-ounce package of this yeast, which is
available  from  King Arthur  Flour’s  website  or Amazon,  among  other  sources.  It  will
keep for six months if stored airtight in the refrigerator. Do not store it in the freezer as
freezing will kill off a small percentage of the yeast.

In most of my recipes, it isn’t necessary to dissolve the dried yeast first. These doughs
have a lot of water in them, so the yeast dissolves rapidly in the dough; just sprinkle it on
top  of  the  dough  and  incorporate  it  as  you  mix  the  dough.  There  are  arguments  for
dissolving first, but I prefer the effect on flavor produced by dissolving the yeast within
the dough. However, be aware that this doesn’t work in a stiff dough mixed by hand. My
rule of thumb is to predissolve the yeast if the dough has 70 percent or less hydration.
This may seem arbitrary, but it takes into account that mixing by hand is gentler and less
vigorous than mixing by machine. So, for example, if you’re mixing a stiff biga, the dried
yeast needs to be dissolved in water before mixing.

Fresh and Instant Yeast If you need to convert a recipe that calls for
fresh yeast, 3 grams fresh yeast = 1 gram instant dried yeast.

Professional bakers use the term commercial yeast to refer to what consumers think of
as store-bought yeast. Commercial yeast is a monoculture, a single species of yeast (the
aforementioned Saccharomyces  cerevisiae) . Levain  cultures,  on  the  other  hand,  are
made up of a community of yeasts that occur naturally in the flour and the environment,
including the air. These wild yeasts aren’t like commercial yeast; they are less vigorous,
and  they  impart  their  own  particular  flavors  to  the  bread.  Part  of  the  complexity  of  a
levain  bread  is  due  to  multiple  strains  of  yeast  coexisting  within  the  culture  that  is
leavening the dough.

Commercial  yeast  causes  breads  to  rise  faster  and  provides  more  lift  to  the  dough,
producing bread with a lighter texture and more volume than levain breads. The slower
activity  of  the  yeast  in  levain  dough,  on  the  other  hand,  allows  time  for  naturally
occurring bacteria to undergo their own fermentation and impart acidity, which gives the
bread  more  complex  flavor,  a  bit  of  tang,  and  a  heartier  crust.  And  because  of  this
acidity, levain breads keep longer before going stale.

I often prefer to add small amounts of commercial yeast to my levain bread doughs to
get the best of both worlds: bread that has winelike complexity and acidity as well as a
light texture in the crumb. Where you do not want the twain to meet is in your levain
culture. The more vigorous commercial yeast will ultimately crowd out the wild yeasts
and take over in a survival-of-the-fittest scenario.

Where Does Our Flour Come From?

It’s mid-August, and my feet crunch and crackle through fragrant, dry wheat stubble.
Combines have just passed through here like massive mowers, shearing the stalks
and leaving empty rows of stubble extending to the horizon. Behind each combine
trails an aromatic dust cloud that smells a little bit like my bakery. Golden wheat
fields turn amber as the sun falls. For four weeks in late summer each year, areas of
eastern Washington ranging from gentle inclines to the dramatic wavelike hills of
the  Palouse  region  are  devoted  to  harvesting  wheat,  a  crop  that  covers  over  2
million acres throughout the state. I arrived bearing one of my bakery’s 3-kilo (6.6-
pound) boules of Country Blonde, my favorite loaf, taking it back to where it was
born.

The  farmers  here  depend  on  these  few  weeks  of  harvest  to  earn  their  annual
wages. This year it’s a generous crop, with thick clusters of stalks that mean a high
yield. However, a late, wet spring and a cooler-than-usual summer delayed the crop
cycle, and harvest began two to three weeks later than normal. The late harvest is
putting more time pressure than usual on getting the wheat into the bin. The stress
points for these farmers are getting the crop harvested before rain comes and doing
it  safely,  without  disabling  equipment  breakdowns.  Many  of  the  farms  run  their
combines  every  day,  nonstop  for  ten  to  twelve  hours,  until  sunset,  seven  days  a
week; some take Sundays off. Some fields are harvested by a single combine; in
others,  teams  are  lined  up  working  in  a  row;  and  in  yet  others,  combines  are
scattered  about.  Trucks  wait  to  be  filled,  then  head  to  the  grain  elevator  to  be
emptied, and then return again, over and over. Or a tractor might be pulling a big
hopper, slowly rolling alongside the combine so it can auger its load of wheat into
the bankout wagon without stopping the cut. Time is important. Equipment breaks
down  and  sometimes  must  be  repaired  in  the  field  in  the  middle  of  a  hot,
occasionally windy August afternoon.

“First thing my father taught me when I was a boy: ‘Don’t rub your eyes.’ ” These
words  of  wisdom  came  from Mike  Kunz  of  Kunz  Farms  near  Davenport,
Washington, after I, happily peppered with chaff and clouds of wheat-harvest dust,
had been rubbing my eyes for the past hour. Mike is one of a few dozen farmers in
the Shepherd’s Grain collective of wheat farmers. They are the people who farm
the wheat that turns into the flour I bake with.

Mike Kunz is a third-generation farmer living in the house his grandfather built.
The schoolhouse down the road is where he, his father, and his grandfather went to
school. Mark  Richter  of  R  &  R  Farms  in  Endicott,  Washington,  also  in  the
Shepherd’s Grain group, is a fourth-generation farmer also working the land of his
forebears.  Mark’s  great-grandfather  Andrew  Richter  homesteaded  in  the  1890s.
Mike and Mark see themselves in the context of a multigenerational responsibility;
they are caretakers of both their land and a legacy. And they are rewarded by the
peace, bounty, and beauty of this magnificent golden terrain they can call their own.
Preserving the land for future generations is responsible stewardship, and these
two farmers, along with the others in the Shepherd’s Grain network, have converted
from  traditional  till-and-seed  farming  to  no-till  direct  seeding,  a  process  that
prevents erosion, allows organic matter to stay in the soil, and improves efficiency.
A plow-pulled drill, looking like a 1950s low-tech sci-fi invader, injects the seeds
and  fertilizer  directly  into  the  soil  at  each  planting.  During  harvest  the  combines
leave behind the wheat stalks and chaff as a mulch, and after harvest the remaining
stubble is slowly consumed by soil microbes. No hay bales in these fields; it all
goes back into the soil, increasing its health and its ability to retain moisture. These
are dry-farmed wheat fields—without irrigation.

Mike’s  farm  sees  about  fourteen  inches  of  annual  precipitation.  Others  get  as
little  as  twelve  inches  per  year.  Moisture  retention  in  the  soil  and  preventing

erosion are everything to these guys. Mark says he’s amazed at how his fields soak
up the rain with no moisture or soil loss, while topsoil on neighboring land that’s
intensively tilled washes away in the same rain. Crop rotations from spring wheat
(planted in March and April), to winter wheat (planted in September and October),
to  fallow  for  a  season  are  typical.  Other  rotation  crops  include  garbanzo  beans,
peas, and sunflowers.

Mike Kunz shows me his cavernous barn, built in 1915 for horses, cattle, and
hay. Before gas-powered combines harvested the crops, teams of up to twenty-five
horses  pulled  combines  that  did  the  same  thing  modern  combines  do.  They  were
mechanical marvels that cut the wheat stalks and thrashed the wheat, using rotating
sieves to separate the wheat from the chaff. The horse-team carriage held a satchel
of stones or clumps of dirt at the ready for the driver to toss at the rumps of lagging
horses when he needed some extra giddyup.

Today, there is about one farm family for every four that used to populate this
land.  Farming  still  appears  to  be  a  prosperous  business,  a  fact  belied  by  dying
towns, ready for and in need of a new generation of settlers. Streets in towns like
Harrington are lined with beautiful, abandoned brick buildings with echoes of faded
paint  advertisements  for  feed  stores  or tobacco.  No  smoking  out  in  the  fields,
though, as the wheat represents a daily fire hazard—guys carry tins of chew if they
need a tobacco fix. A spark from a worn part on the combine can start a fire in a
hurry. It is bone dry out here, often with a breeze. These farmers carry both fire and
hail insurance. Fire and the dangers inherent in working with heavy equipment are
the principal safety hazards. Some of the combines have to negotiate steep hillsides,
and experience and caution are important.

Of course, there is the off-season, when equipment is serviced, planting rotations
are planned out, and a well-deserved rest is taken. And in June there’s the annual

Combine Demolition Derby in Lind, Washington. Gotta have some fun!

Protein content has long been a measure of marketability for wheat. The demand
from  large,  industrial  bakeries  for  high-protein  flour  places  a  premium  on  wheat
with  a  higher  percentage  of  protein.  Protein  content  goes  up  as  the  plant  gets
stressed,  and  stress  is  higher  when  the  plant  has  less  moisture  (to  a  point—
obviously there is a minimum amount of moisture needed for the plant to produce).
This year the protein content will be a bit lower because of the late spring and cool
summer.  The quality  of  protein,  however,  relates  to  the  gluten’s  ability  to  retain
fermentation gases and expand without breaking, and this is governed more by the
genetics of the variety of wheat and environmental factors like soil health than it is
by soil moisture content. So a harvest with lower protein content can have protein
of excellent quality. Bakers like me prefer lower-protein flour. I told them not to
worry about protein content on my account. Yes, they laughed—I’m not one of their
biggest customers.

A bushel of wheat berries weighs 60 pounds. On stalks in the field you can see
rows of individual berries that will be ground into flour, surrounded by husks with
cat-whisker hairs called awns. The combine cuts the stalks, threshes to separate out
the wheat berries from the seed heads, and then uses a blower and a rotary sieve to
separate the wheat from the chaff—and all of that happens very quickly. What you
get at the end of the process is a bin full of the marketable crop: bushels of wheat.
At delivery the wheat is graded for moisture content and cleanliness; farmers pay a
price  if  the  grade  is  reduced,  perhaps  because  their  equipment  didn’t  do  a  good
enough job separating the wheat from the chaff. For them, it’s not just a saying—a
reduction in grade can mean a big loss of money.

Wheat is trucked from the local grain elevators to a mill in Spokane, where it’s
combined with wheat harvested at other Shepherd’s Grain farms and stored in silos.
It will be milled throughout the year into whole wheat and white wheat flours, then
bagged and shipped to distribution partners for final delivery. The red winter wheat
is  milled  into  all-purpose  flour  with  medium  protein  levels,  usually  in  the  11
percent range, although this season, because the plants weren’t stressed as much, the
protein content will be around 10.5 percent. This is the white flour I buy. The dark
northern spring wheat will be milled to make a sweet, not very bitter whole wheat
flour (the wheat variety these farms are planting produces less tannins than many
other  varieties)  and  also  high-gluten  white  flour  with  protein  in  the  13  percent
range. Soft white winter wheat is milled into pastry flour and cake flour.

This  is  where  my  flour  comes  from. And  now  that  I’ve  brought  my  three-kilo

boule to these wheat fields, the flour has come full circle.

PART 2
BASIC BREAD RECIPES

CHAPTER 4
BASIC BREAD METHOD

T

his chapter provides guidelines and instruction in techniques that apply to all of the
recipes  in  this  book.  The  individual  recipes  differ  in  schedule,  the  blend  of  flours
used,  the  fermentation  method,  and  the  complexity  of  the  process.  Once  you’re
familiar  with  the  techniques  discussed  here,  including  hand  mixing  the  dough,
applying folds, shaping round loaves, using refrigeration to retard the loaves, and baking
in Dutch ovens, you can successfully make any bread or pizza dough in this book.

Each bread has its own character. The flavor complexity scale that follows indicates

the degree to which different processes result in bread with more complexity of taste.

To decide which bread to make, choose a recipe that works with your schedule. If you
have some flexibility in your schedule, then you have more freedom to choose a recipe
based on the character you want in your bread. For example, if I’m going to be available
during the day, I might choose to make the White Bread with Poolish. If I want to bake
first thing in the morning, I’d choose one of the levain breads in part 3 of the book or the
Overnight 40% Whole Wheat Bread because they proof overnight in the refrigerator. My
personal preference, if the timelines work, is almost always to bake one of the levain
breads in part 3.

Once you have become familiar with the recipes, the process, and the timing, you can
alter the flour blend as you wish. In the essay “Making a Bread (or Pizza) Dough You
Can Call Your Own” , I give specific guidance on how to adjust the types of flour, the
amount of water, or hydration, the timing, and more. That information will allow you to
transform any recipe in this book to suit your whim or your pantry.

The  recipes  in chapter  5,  Straight  Doughs,  are  accessible  to  anyone,  regardless  of
experience.  Good  first  recipes for  novice  bakers  are  the  two  Saturday  Breads  (The
Saturday  White  Bread  and The  Saturday  75%  Whole  Wheat  Bread).  They  are  the

simplest, and yield good bread, and both can be made from start to finish in a single day.
The  Saturday  Breads  take  seven  to  eight  hours  of  elapsed  time,  with  an  initial
fermentation of five hours. While eight hours might seem like a long time, the actual time
engaged in making them is perhaps forty-five minutes, including cleanup. They are very
simple, especially after you have made them a few times.

The remaining recipes in chapter 5 use a little more water in the dough. These softer
doughs are actually easier to hand mix but a little more difficult to shape because wetter
dough is stickier. They have a little more flavor from fermentation and also offer more
schedule options. You can mix the dough in the evening, shape it into loaves the next
morning, and bake an hour or two after that; or you can mix the dough in the afternoon,
shape it into loaves in the evening, refrigerate the loaves overnight, and bake them first
thing the next morning.

The four straight dough recipes are the simplest in the book. The Saturday Breads are
great for days when you wake up and decide, “This would be a good day to make some
bread.” But if you think about it the day or night before, I recommend that you move on to
chapter  6,  Doughs  Made  with  Pre-Ferments.  These  recipes  are  equally  approachable;
they  just  take  a  bit  of  foresight—and  they  make  tastier  bread.  See Detail  2:  Use  Pre-
Ferments When Time Allows for more on poolish and biga, the two pre-ferments I use in
this book. Once you’re familiar with working with pre-ferments, move on to the recipes
in part 3 of the book, Levain Bread Recipes.

READING THE RECIPE TABLES

As  mentioned,  the  recipes  in  this  book  are  a  bit  atypical  in  that  ingredients  aren’t
necessarily listed in the order in which they’re used. Rather, flour is always listed first,
followed  by  water,  salt,  and  yeast,  reflecting  the  relative  quantities,  or  baker’s
percentage,  of  these  ingredients  in  the  recipe.  Here’s  a  quick  explanation  of  the
information in the different columns of the recipe tables, followed by an example.

FINAL  DOUGH  MIX  QUANTITY:  This  column  (which  is  just  called  “Quantity”  in  the  straight
dough recipes) gives the quantities of each ingredient you’ll put in your empty 12-quart
tub for the final dough mix, to bring the total weight of flour up to 1,000 grams beyond
the amount in the poolish, biga, or levain, and add other ingredients as needed. All of the
amounts you need to know appear in the various columns and are repeated in the recipe
steps  for  ease  of  use  so  you  don’t  have  to  turn  back  to  the  recipe  table  to  recall  the
amount.

As  I’m  sure  you’ve  figured  out  by  now,  I  am  a  strong  advocate  for  measuring
ingredients  by  weight,  not volume. However, some home bakers do not own a kitchen
scale. For those bakers, I have included approximate volumes of the ingredients you will

add to the final dough mix. These volume measurements are not nearly as precise as their
corresponding weight  measurements;  for  this  reason  the  volume  measurements  do  not
exactly  match  up  to  the  baker’s  percentage  column  on  the  left.  For  a  more  detailed
explanation of the issues that arise from baking by volume, see Weight Versus Volume
Measurements.

QUANTITY IN POOLISH, BIGA, OR LEVAIN:  This column shows the amount of flour and water in
the poolish, biga, or levain used in the recipe. For the breads in chapter 6, made with
pre-ferments, the entire amount of pre-ferment is added to the final dough, and therefore
the quantities in this column are the same as those in the poolish and biga ingredients
lists, which appear above the baker’s percentage table. When making the levain breads
in part 3 of the book, you’ll only use a portion of your levain culture in the final dough,
so the quantities of flour and water in the levain column will be less than the amounts
called for in the ingredients lists for feeding the levain—usually far less. The reason for
this is you want enough levain left over to keep the culture going.

TOTAL RECIPE QUANTITY: This column lists the total weight of the ingredient in the recipe. If
white flour is 90 percent of the 1,000 grams of total flour, then the amount of white flour
will  be  900  grams.  For  straight  dough  breads,  the  only  other  column  will  be  the
approximate volume measurements for each ingredient.

BAKER’S PERCENTAGE: All ingredient weights are shown as a percentage of the total weight
of flour in the recipe. All of the bread and pizza dough recipes in this book use 1,000
grams  of  flour  altogether,  making  the  math  easy  to  follow  and  the  recipes  easy  to
remember.  (See A  Note  on  Baker’s  Percentages  for  more  information  on baker’s
percentages.)

Final Dough

INGREDIENT

White flour
Water

FINAL DOUGH MIX
QUANTITY
500 g
250 g, 105ºF (41ºC)

Fine sea salt

21 g

Instant dried
yeast

3 g

Poolish

1,000 g

Baker’s Formula
QUANTITY IN
POOLISH

 
3¾ cups + 2 tbsp 500 g
1⅛ cups
500 g
1 tbsp + 1 scant
tsp

0

¾ tsp

0.4 g

All from recipe
above

 

TOTAL RECIPE
QUANTITY
1,000 g
750 g

BAKER’S
PERCENTAGE
100%
75%

21 g

3.4 g

 

2.1%

0.34%

50%

STEP-BY-STEP GUIDE TO BASIC BREAD TECHNIQUES

The recipes throughout this book use the same basic method for all of the stages, from

mixing to baking, outlined in the following pages in eight steps. Even the pizza dough
recipes in chapter 13 utilize these steps up through the shaping of dough balls. I think it’s
valuable  to  review  the  process  steps  outside  of  the  recipe  format  to  keep  the  recipes
concise and readable. It encourages a better understanding of the techniques to present
them  separate  from  the  recipe  itself.  Since  the  techniques  are  the  same  for  all  of  the
recipes, once you get it, you can work with the entire book confidently. I encourage you
to  sit  down  and  read  through  this  chapter  before  you  begin;  it’s  hard  to  absorb  this
information when you are in the middle of making a bread or pizza dough recipe for the
first time.

STEP 1: AUTOLYSE THE FLOUR AND WATER

Autolyse is my first step in mixing bread and pizza dough. The flour and water in the
recipe are mixed and allowed to rest for a minimum of 15 minutes before the salt and
yeast are added. I recommend an autolyse period of 20 to 30 minutes for the recipes in
this book. Don’t add the salt during the autolyse, as it will inhibit water absorption by
the flour, and one of the goals of this step is to allow complete hydration of the flour
before mixing the final dough.

Measuring

The  autolyse  step  takes  about  5  minutes  of  hands-on time  for  measuring  the  flour  and
water and mixing them by hand. Place your empty 12-quart dough tub on the scale, zero
the scale, then add the weight of flour specified in the recipe’s Final Dough Mix column.
(Remember, the flour should be at room temperature.)

It’s easy to add too much water, so instead of measuring the amount of water directly
into the dough tub with the flour in it, I measure it into an empty container, then pour the
correct weight of water into the tub with the flour. Also, some scales, like mine, max out
on the weight they can measure before all the water has been added to the flour-filled
tub. That’s another reason to weigh the water separately.

The  easiest  way  to  measure  out  water  is  to  use  two  containers.  Keeping  your
thermometer handy, put one container under the tap and adjust the hot and cold water mix
until the water in the container is at the target temperature, for example, 95°F (35°C). Put
the  empty  container  on  your  scale,  zero  the  scale,  and  pour  in  water  from  the  first
container until you reach the weight of water called for in the recipe. Be precise with the
weighing.  Being  off  by  as  little  as  20  or  30  grams  can  make  a  big  difference  in  the
consistency of the dough.

USING YOUR KITCHEN SCALE

Put your empty container on the scale, push the scale’s “zero” button (sometimes
labeled “tare”), and after the scales zeroes out, carefully pour in the ingredient until
you  reach  the  desired  weight.  When  you  have  multiple  ingredients  to  add  to  the
container, such as two or three different kinds of flour, just press the “zero” button
after each addition.

Incorporating the Flour and Water

Working directly in the 12-quart dough tub, mix the flour and water with one hand just
until incorporated. Your hand will get sticky with dough. Don’t worry; you need to get
used to using your hand as an implement. Even though dough bits are sticking to you (just
like  they  would  stick  to  a  dough  hook),  keep  mixing  until  the  flour  and  water  are
integrated. Any dough clumps should be pinched through with your hand. After mixing,
use your free hand to squeegee the dough that’s stuck to your working hand into the tub.
Put a lid on the container and let the dough rest for 20 to 30 minutes. You will know the
autolyse mixture is ready when there are no longer any loose bits of dry flour visible in
the dough tub.

Working with Water Temperature

In  all  of  the  recipes  in  this  book  (except  the  poolish  and  biga  recipes,  for  reasons
explained below), the goal is for the final mixed dough to have a temperature of about
78°F (26°C). As mentioned in chapter 2, this seems to be the ideal temperature for both
gas production and flavor development. The dough doesn’t need to stay at 78°F (26°C)
throughout its development; it just needs to start there. I tested these recipes in my home
kitchen, which is usually around 70°F (21°C). Using water at 95°F (35°C), flour at room
temperature, and a 20-minute autolyse period, once the dough was completely mixed, it
was  usually  right  at  78°F  (26°C)  during  winter.  In  the  summer,  I  ratchet  the  water
temperature  down  to  90°F  (32°C)  to  get  the  same  result. All  this  is  to  say  there’s  a
relationship  between  the  temperature  of  the  water you  use  for  the  autolyse,  the
temperature  of  your  kitchen,  and  the  length  of  time  you  let  the  autolyse  mixture  rest
before mixing the final dough.

Although I recommend a 20- to 30-minute autolyse, you can extend it to 40 or even 60
minutes if that’s more convenient for you. However, the autolyse mixture will cool down

more, so your final mix temperature will be lower and you may need to adjust your water
temperature  to  compensate.  Just  don’t  use  water  above  110°F  (43°C).  (As  you  may
recall, temperatures much warmer than that can kill the yeast.) If you miss the target final
mix  temperature  of  78°F  (26°C),  review  the  temperature  of  water  you  used  and  the
timing of the autolyse period, then adjust next time.

Recipes from this book that use a pre-ferment (a poolish or biga) will rarely have a
final mix temperature of 78°F (26°C), especially if your house is cool at night. This is
because  a  large  proportion  of  the  dough  consists  of  the  pre-ferment,  which  has
developed overnight and will therefore be at room temperature—whatever the overnight
temperature  of  your  house  is.  The  overnight  temperature  in  my  house  is  about  65°F
(18°C), and while I was testing these recipes, the final mix temperature for doughs made
with pre-ferments was usually 73°F to 74°F (about 23°C).

WHEN NOT TO AUTOLYSE

In this book, the only recipes that don’t have an autolyse step are those made with
poolish or biga, where half or more of the recipe’s total flour is in the pre-ferment.
These doughs obtain benefits similar to those produced in the autolyse due to the
long, overnight development of the pre-ferment, which includes only a bit of yeast
and  no  salt.  Autolysing  dough  made  with  poolish  is  also  impractical.  For  this
book’s  recipes  that  incorporate  a  poolish,  the  additional  ingredients  for  the  final
dough mix include only 250 grams of water but another 500 grams of flour, which
would result in dough clumps that are impossible to work out manually.

WHEN TO HYDRATE THE YEAST

Granular dried yeast takes longer to dissolve in stiffer doughs (in my world, that
would be a hydration of 70 percent or less). Store-bought instant yeast is designed
to work without being dissolved first, but that’s based on the assumption that the
dough  will  be  mixed  by  a  machine,  which  incorporates  the  ingredients  far  more
aggressively than hand mixing does. We don’t hydrate, or proof, instant yeast at my
bakery, but that’s because we typically use fresh yeast in our stiff doughs.

The first time I hand mixed an overnight biga (at 68 percent hydration) with instant

yeast while testing a recipe in this book, I was surprised by the lack of gassiness
and  rise  in  the  biga  the  next  morning.  On  my  next  try,  I  kept  the  same  mix
proportions and water temperature but hydrated the instant yeast for a few minutes
first,  and—voilà!—my  biga  looked  like  a  biga  in  the  morning.  I  did  a  little
research,  and  one  major  yeast  manufacturer  acknowledged  that  hydrating  instant
yeast before mixing allows for maximum efficiency of the yeast, even though it’s
designed  for  use  without  proofing.  So,  based  on  all  of  this,  I’ve  arrived  at
recommending the old-school method of proofing instant yeast for this book’s stiffer
doughs. In these few cases, the recipe specifies proofing the yeast in advance.

All of that said, the majority of the doughs in this book have enough water in them
that is isn’t necessary to proof instant dried yeast. Even with hand mixing, the high
hydration  ensures  that  the  yeast  granules  dissolve  completely  and  become  active
early in the dough’s evolution. The exceptions are for biga (at 68 percent hydration)
and pizza doughs (at 70 percent hydration).

STEP 2: MIX THE DOUGH

Hand mixing the final dough should take about 5 minutes. I prefer to mix it by hand in the
dough tub, rather than kneading it on the counter or using a mixer. It’s simpler, faster, and
entails less cleanup, and it’s fully effective. The dough stays in the same tub from the
autolyse step until it is divided and shaped into loaves about five or six hours later,
depending on the recipe. No fuss, no muss!

Incorporating the Salt and Yeast

To mix the dough, first sprinkle the salt and (in most cases) the yeast evenly over the top
of the dough. If making a recipe with a pre-ferment, empty the entire amount of poolish or
biga, or the specified quantity of levain, into the dough tub on top of the salt and yeast.

Set up a container of warm water next to your dough station. Hold the dough tub by the
rim with your weaker hand and wet your stronger hand in the warm water. Begin to mix
by reaching underneath the dough and grabbing about one-quarter of the dough. Stretch
this  section  of  dough,  then  fold  it  over  the  top  to  the  other  side  of  the  dough.  When
folding segments of dough, stretch them out to the point of resistance, then fold them back
across the entire length of the dough mass. Working your way around the dough, repeat
with  the  remaining  quarters  of  the  dough,  reaching  underneath  each  time  and  fully

enclosing the salt and yeast inside the folds of dough.

Incorporating the salt and yeast.

Using the Pincer Method

Once  all  of  the  dough  has  been  folded  over  itself,  continue  mixing  using  the  pincer
method. Using a pincerlike grip with your thumb and forefinger, squeeze big chunks of
dough and then tighten your grip to cut through the dough. Do this repeatedly, working
through the entire mass of dough. With your other hand, turn the tub while you’re mixing
to give your active hand a good angle of attack.

Dip  your  mixing  hand  back  into  the  container  of  warm  water  three  or  four  times
throughout  this  process  to  rewet  it  and  prevent  the  dough  from  sticking  to  you.  If  you
don’t, the dough will be sticky and hard to work. It is normal to feel the granularity of the
salt  and  yeast  as  you  mix;  using  a  moist  hand  for  mixing  will  help  the  salt  and  yeast
dissolve.

Cut through the dough five or six times with the pincer method, then fold it over itself
a few times, then once again cut through it five or six times and fold over itself a few
more times. Repeat this process, alternating between cutting and folding, until you feel
and see that all of the ingredients are fully integrated and the dough has some tension in
it.  For  me,  this  takes  2  or  3  minutes.  When  you’re  new  at  this,  it  could  take  5  or  6
minutes. Let the dough rest for a few minutes, then fold for another 30 seconds or until
the dough tightens up. That’s it for mixing!

The  goal  of  this  step  is  to  thoroughly  incorporate  all  of  the  ingredients.  The  pincer

method, which I learned at the San Francisco Baking Institute, mimics the dough-cutting
action  of  good  mechanical  mixers.  It  effectively  incorporates  the  ingredients  and
distributes the salt and yeast throughout the mix.

At the end of the mix, measure the temperature of the dough with a probe thermometer.
In  most  of  the  recipes  in  this  book,  the  target  temperature  is  77°F  to  78°F  (25°C  to
26°C).  Write  down  the final mix temperature and the time. If the dough temperature is
well below 77°F (25°C), it will take longer to rise, in which case you’ll need to follow
the  recipe  instructions  regarding  how  much  the  dough  should  expand,  rather  than  the
suggested  time. Alternatively, you can compensate by placing the dough tub in a warm
spot for the rise—75°F to 80°F (24°C to 27°C) should work.

As mentioned in chapter 2, I recommend keeping a log that records water temperature
you  used,  the  time  the  mix  ended  and  the  room  temperature,  how  long  it  took  for  the
dough to double or triple in volume, at what time you divided and shaped the dough into
loaves, and what time you baked it, with some comments on how it all came out. You
may make adjustments that better suit your schedule for future mixes—a little more yeast
if the dough wasn’t ready in five or six hours, or a little less yeast if the dough moved too
fast. Use warmer or cooler water next time if your mix temperature was below or well
above 78°F (26°C).

Using the pincer method.

Letting the Dough Rise

Cover  the  tub  and  let  the  dough  rise.  The  amount  of  time  this  takes  depends  on  many
factors,  especially  the  ambient  temperature  and  the  final  mix  temperature.  Regard  the
visual cues in the recipe as your target, keeping in mind that your dough will have a little
more volume in warmer months and a little less volume in cooler months.

STEP 3: FOLD THE DOUGH

Folding  the  dough  helps  develop  the  gluten  that  gives  the  dough  its  strength  and
contributes to good volume in the final loaf. Think of the three-dimensional web of gluten
as the frame of the bread “house.” For the first recipe, the Saturday White Bread, just
two folds are needed. Most of the other bread doughs have higher hydration, and many of
these slack doughs benefit from three or four folds to give them the strength they need.
Each fold takes about 1 minute. You’ll be able to recognize when to apply the next fold
based on how relaxed the dough has become: it goes from being a ball with structure to
lying flattened out in the tub. With each fold, it firms up a bit. I try to work in all the folds
during the first hour or two of the rise.

The action here is just like the folding during mixing in step 2, but after folding, you’ll
invert the dough to help it hold its tension. See the step-by-step photos illustrating the
folding process for details. To fold the dough, dip your active hand in the container of
warm water to wet it so the dough doesn’t stick to you. With your moistened hand, reach
underneath the dough and pull about one-quarter of it out and up to stretch it until you feel
resistance, then fold it over the top to the other side of the dough. Repeat four or five
times, working around the dough until the dough has tightened into a ball. Grab the entire
ball  and  invert  it  so  the  seam  side,  where  all  of  the  folds  have  come  together,  faces
down. This helps the folds hold their position. The top should be smooth.

When the dough relaxes a bit and flattens in the bottom of the tub, repeat the process
for the second fold. After each fold, the dough develops more structure, or strength, than
it  had  before  and  will  therefore  take  longer  to  completely  relax.  You  can  do  any
subsequent folds called for in the recipe an hour or two later, or you can give the dough
all of its folds in the first hour after mixing—whatever is convenient for you. Just don’t
fold the dough during the last hour of bulk fermentation.

Folding the relaxed dough

Top row: Dough ready for its first fold, after its first fold, ready for its second fold. Bottom row: Dough

after its second fold, ready for its third fold, after its third fold.

STEP 4: DIVIDE THE DOUGH

When the dough has doubled or tripled (whichever is specified in the recipe), it’s time to
divide it. One of the reasons clear Cambro tubs are so handy for bread making is that
they allow you to quickly determine when bulk fermentation is complete. For example, if
a dough should triple in size during bulk fermentation and it starts out at a little more than
1 quart, it should come up to nearly the 4-quart line once tripled. This step will take just
a few minutes once you’ve done it a couple times. At first it may take a little longer.

Lightly flour a work surface; you’ll need an area about 2 feet wide. Working next to
the floured area, flour your hands and gently loosen the dough all the way around the
perimeter of the tub, taking care not to let the gluten strands tear. (At this point the gluten
is more delicate than it was when the dough was first mixed.) Then reach to the bottom
of the tub and gently loosen the bottom of the dough from the tub. It’s helpful to toss some
flour along the edges to work underneath the dough and help ease its release. Then turn
the tub on its side and use your hands to help gently ease the dough out onto the work
surface. Sprinkle flour across the middle of the top of the dough, where you’ll cut it, then
divide it into two equal-size pieces with a dough knife, plastic dough scraper, or kitchen
knife.

Dividing the dough

STEP 5: SHAPE THE LOAVES

The  goal  of shaping  is  to  form  each  piece  of  dough  into  a  medium-tight  round  while
taking care to preserve the gas that has built up in the dough.

Be  aware  that  when  your  dough  pieces  are  sitting  on  the  floured  work  surface,  the
underside of the dough will become the outside of the loaf; this will help you understand
the shaping process. The bottom of each piece of dough is sitting on some flour, so it’s
not going to be as sticky there. Keeping your hands in contact with that part of the dough
is the most important advice I can offer; otherwise the dough will stick to your hands.

Begin by brushing any loose flour off the top of the dough with your hand. Then, using
the same technique as in the folding step, stretch and fold one-quarter of the dough at a
time up and over the top to form a round, gently pulling each segment out until you get to
its maximum stretch, then folding it over the top to the opposite side. Repeat, working

your way around the dough and forming it into a ball, until the interior is fully enclosed
and you have a round with a little tension in it. Then flip it over so the seam is on the
work surface in an area cleared of flour—at this point you want the friction, or grip, of a
clean surface. You are now looking at the smooth surface of the loaf, which will face up
in the proofing basket and down while the loaf is baking.

Cup your hands around the back of the dough ball as you face it. Pull the entire dough
ball  6  or  8  inches  toward  you  on  the  dry,  unfloured  surface,  leading  with  your  pinky
fingers  and  applying  enough  pressure  so  the  dough  ball  grips  your  work  surface  and
doesn’t just slide across it. As you pull, this will tighten up the ball and add tension to it.
You can feel it. It feels good.

Give the loaf a quarter turn and repeat this tightening step. Proceed in this way until
you’ve gone all the way around the dough ball two or three times. The loaf doesn’t need
to be super tight, but you don’t want it to be loose, either. I am looking for enough tension
so that the loaf holds its shape and its gases. If the shaped loaves are too soft, without
enough  tension,  there’s  less  physical  structure  to  hold  on  to  the  gases.  Some  gas  will
escape, resulting in bread that’s smaller and a bit heavier than the ideal.

Repeat  the  shaping  process  with  the  second  piece  of  dough  and  place  both  shaped
loaves seam side down in a proofing container: a flour-dusted wicker proofing basket, a
flour-dusted cloth-covered banneton, or, in a pinch, large kitchen bowls lined with lint-
free tea towels and generously dusted with flour. You need to use enough flour so that the
fully proofed loaf can be removed without sticking but not so much that you end up with
a lot of excess flour on the loaf.

Lightly flour the top of the shaped loaves and cover with a kitchen towel or put the

proofing baskets in nonperforated plastic bags.

STEP 6: PROOF THE SHAPED LOAVES

In the baking industry, the term proofing is commonly used to refer to the final rise, after
the loaf is shaped. (It is also used to refer to hydrating yeast before the dough mix;.) To
achieve the full potential of your loaves, you need to proof them completely. The loaves
must reach their physical limit for holding on to their gases before the gluten network
begins to break down as the proteins degrade over time. Bake too soon, and you lose the
last smidgen of flavor and volume development the bread was capable of, and the loaves
will be too tight and will bloom unevenly. Bake too late (overproof) and the loaves will
deflate, collapsing and losing volume. (Me and Goldilocks would have been friends.)
The timeline for proofing varies by recipe in this book, from a little over one hour for the
Saturday Breads to overnight in the refrigerator for most of the levain recipes and the
Overnight 40% Whole Wheat Bread. Also keep in mind that a more tightly shaped loaf

will  hold  its  proof  longer,  whereas  a  loosely  shaped  loaf  will  lose  its  gases  more
quickly.

Shaping the loaves. First row: Stretching a segment of dough and folding it over itself. Second row:

Stretching a second segment of dough and folding it over itself. Third row: Folding the final segment of
dough over itself. Fourth row: Cupping hands around the back of the dough ball and pulling it across the

unfloured work surface; a finished dough ball.

One mark of a seasoned baker is the ability to bake the bread at that perfect point of
the proof every time, and it remains a frequent topic of conversation at my bakery. It’s
true  not  just  for  breads,  but  for  croissants  and  brioche,  too.  We  learn  by  doing,  and
sometimes the best way to learn is to be willing to have a loaf that’s a bit overproofed.

This will help you understand what the limits are.

The Finger-Dent Test

In each recipe I mention the finger-dent test for proofing. It remains the most foolproof
method  I  know.  To  do  the  test,  poke  the  rising  loaf  with  a  floured  finger,  making  an
indentation  about  ½  inch  deep.  If  it  springs  back  immediately,  the  loaf  needs  more
proofing time. If the indentation springs back slowly and incompletely, the loaf is fully
proofed  and  ready  to  bake.  If  the  indentation  doesn’t  spring  back  at  all,  the  loaf  is
overproofed. You’ve waited too long, and the loaf may collapse a bit when you remove
it  from  its  basket  or  put  it  into  the  Dutch  oven  for  baking.  (Still,  occasionally  I’m
surprised to find that a loaf I thought overproofed holds its form and bakes up just fine.)

The straight doughs made with store-bought yeast, in chapter 5, rise faster than levain
breads and also have a shorter window of time for being at the perfectly proofed stage—
sometimes as short as 10 to 15 minutes. This is when you need to put the loaves in the
oven. You can extend that window by proofing these breads overnight in the refrigerator.
The cold dough will develop more slowly, giving you a window of ideal proofing up to
a couple of hours.

STEP 7: PREHEAT THE OVEN AND DUTCH OVEN

Position a rack in the middle of the oven. If you bake too close to the bottom of the oven,
you run the risk of scorching the bottom of the loaves. Put your 4-quart Dutch oven inside
with the lid on. There is no need to place the Dutch oven on a pizza stone; the cast-iron
mass  serves  a  similar  purpose.  Preheat  the  oven  to  475°F  (245°C)  for  at  least  45
minutes. The goal is for the Dutch oven to be fully saturated with oven heat before you
place the loaf inside.

It’s  important  to  know  your  oven.  Most  home  ovens  run  hotter  or  cooler  than  the
temperature you set them to. Mine runs about 25°F cooler, so when I set it to 500°F I

actually  get  475°F.  The  temperatures  given  in  the  recipe  are,  of  course,  the  actual
temperature  the  bread  should  be  baked  at,  so  I  recommend  that  you  use  an oven
thermometer.  They  only  cost  a  few  dollars,  and  using  one  will  assure  you  that  you’re
baking at the proper temperature, allowing you to follow the suggested baking times with
confidence.

If you have two Dutch ovens and can fit both of them in the oven at the same time,
preheat  both  of  them.  If  you  only  have  one  Dutch  oven,  each  recipe  offers  specific
instructions  on  how  to  store  the  second  loaf  while  the  first  one  bakes.  Generally
speaking, if your loaves proof at room temperature, you should put the second loaf in the
refrigerator  somewhere  around  15  to  20  minutes  before  baking  the  first  loaf.  If  your
loaves proof in the refrigerator overnight, keep the second loaf in the refrigerator while
the first loaf is baking. Once the first loaf comes out of the oven, reheat the Dutch oven
for about 5 minutes before baking the second loaf.

STEP 8: BAKE—VERY CAREFULLY

All of the breads in this book bake in covered preheated Dutch ovens for 30 minutes at
475°F (245°C), then the lid is removed while the bread finishes baking, usually 15 to 20
minutes longer. Each recipe specifies baking times.

When working with Dutch ovens, I heartily recommend using oven mitts rather than
kitchen  towels  or  pot  holders.  Oven  mitts  go  partway  up  your  forearms,  providing
greater  protection  from  the  high  heat  of  the  Dutch  oven  and  its  lid.  I  act  with  greater
confidence  when  wearing  oven  mitts  and  encourage  you  to  wear  them.  Once  a  Dutch
oven is out of the oven, I find it helpful to put the mitts on the hot lid handle so I won’t
absentmindedly pick it up without first putting a mitt back on. Take every precaution.

To transfer the dough from the proofing basket to the Dutch oven, first carefully invert
the proofed loaf from its basket onto a floured countertop, keeping in mind that the top of
the baked loaf will be the side that was facing down while it was rising. If the dough
sticks to the edges of the proofing basket, use one hand to delicately release the dough—
and make a mental note that you need to dust the basket with a bit more flour the next
time. Ideally, the weight of the dough should cause it to ease onto the countertop without
any assistance. New wicker baskets need a little more flour than seasoned baskets, and
they do not need to be cleaned between uses.

Experienced  bakers  may  notice  that  I  don’t  call  for scoring the loaves with a razor
before baking. Because the loaves are baked with the seam side up (the side opposite the
smooth top of the shaped loaf in the proofing basket) and after a complete proof, fissures
will naturally open on the top of the loaf as it expands in the oven. I love the organic
look of the natural splits. It’s the way ciabatta opens up in the oven at my bakery.

Next, very carefully place the loaf in the hot Dutch oven. It’s already resting on the
counter  right  side  up,  so  just  carefully  drop  it  into  the  Dutch  oven  without  flipping  it
over. Use the sides of your bare hands to pick up the loaf and place it in the pot. Don’t
pick  it  up  with  your  fingertips;  it’s  delicate  at  this  stage  and  it’s  best  to  spread  the
pressure needed to pick it up across the dough. Use mitts to put the lid on the Dutch oven
and place it in the preheated oven.

When you remove the lid after 30 minutes of baking, the loaf will be fully risen and
you should see one or more attractive splits in the top where the dough expanded. The
crust should have a light brown color. Use the time in the recipe as a guideline for how
long to bake the loaf uncovered, but be sure to check about 5 minutes before the time has
elapsed so you’re in tune with the loaf’s progress. Bake until dark brown all around the
loaf. I like to bake until there are spots of very dark brown for the full flavors those bits
of crust have. At least once, you should try baking a loaf just shy of the point of burning it
—I’m wowed by the way these dark loaves look and taste.

When the bread is fully baked, remove the Dutch oven from your kitchen oven and tilt
it to turn the loaf out. Let it cool on a rack or set on its side so air can circulate around it.
Let the loaf rest for at least 20 minutes before slicing. The inside of the loaf continues to
bake  after  it’s  removed  from  the  oven,  and  it  needs  that  time  to  finish.  Enjoy  the
crackling sound of the cooling bread.

MAKING PIZZA OR FOCACCIA WITH HALF THE DOUGH

If you don’t want to make two loaves of bread, some of the doughs can be used to make
pizza or focaccia, as noted after the yield. I actually believe that any dough, even rye, can
be used for focaccia, but in the recipes, I only call out the doughs most conventionally
suited for this use. For pizza, divide the remaining dough into 340-gram balls and follow
any of the pizza recipes in chapter 14. For focaccia, you’ll find guidelines on amounts of
dough  and  preparation  methods  in  the  section “Making  Focaccia  with  Bread  Dough”.
Shape the dough into balls and let them rest in the refrigerator for several hours or up to
a couple of days.

STORING BAKED BREAD

I got over my aversion to storing bread in plastic bags many years ago, after trying all the
alternatives and realizing nothing else keeps the bread as well. The crust will soften, but
the bread won’t dry out. The straight dough breads will keep for two or three days. The
breads made with pre-ferments will keep a day longer than that, and the levain breads
from this book will keep for five to six days, if you don’t eat it all before then!

From left: Field Blend #2, The Saturday White Bread, Bran-Encrusted Levain Bread.

CHAPTER 5
STRAIGHT DOUGHS

THE SATURDAY WHITE BREAD

THE SATURDAY 75% WHOLE WHEAT BREAD

OVERNIGHT WHITE BREAD

OVERNIGHT 40% WHOLE WHEAT BREAD

The Saturday White Bread

THE SATURDAY WHITE BREAD

This recipe is designed for someone who wants to make good, crusty loaves of white
bread from start to finish in one day. Mix the dough first thing in the morning, shape it
into two loaves about five hours later, and then bake in the late afternoon in time for
dinner. It’s also a good first recipe to try from this book to help you get familiar with my
dough handling techniques, which are the same for all the recipes in this book. Here you
get  the  taste-good  benefits  of  a  medium-length  fermentation,  resulting  in  a  versatile,
delicious bread that’s great as a dinner bread and also works well for sandwiches and
toast.

Sometimes I like to make this bread with 10 percent whole wheat flour for the round,
earthy flavors it adds. If you want to do that, simply make this recipe with 900 grams of
white flour and 100 grams of whole wheat flour.

You can bake one or two loaves from this recipe. If you bake just one loaf, you can
divide the remaining dough into two or three dough balls to make iron-skillet focaccia or
pizza; refrigerate the dough balls and use them any time during the next two or three days.
I love focaccia with olive oil, salt, pepper, and maybe a sprinkling of herbs, cut into
small pieces to share with friends before dinner, or just for snacks. (See chapter 14 for
specific focaccia and pizza recipes, and Making Focaccia with Bread Dough for pointers
on using bread doughs for focaccia.)

THIS RECIPE MAKES 2 LOAVES, EACH ABOUT 1½ POUNDS, AND IS SUITABLE FOR PIZZA OR FOCACCIA.
BULK FERMENTATION: About 5 hours
PROOF TIME: About 1¼ hours
SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Begin at 9:30 a.m., finish mixing at 10 a.m., shape into loaves
at 3 p.m., and bake at 4:15 p.m. The bread will come out of the oven just
after 5 p.m.

INGREDIENT
White flour
Water
Fine sea salt
Instant dried yeast

QUANTITY
1,000 g
720 g, 90ºF to 95ºF (32ºC to 35ºC)
21 g
4 g

 
7¾ cups
3⅛ cups
1 tbsp + 1 scant tsp
1 tsp

BAKER’S PERCENTAGE
100%
72%
2.1%
0.4%

The “Ingredients” section in chapter 3 gives advice on what type of flour to use. I

don’t recommend high-protein bread flour (sometimes called high-gluten flour). All-
purpose flour is ideal for the recipes in this book. Flour should always be at room
temperature.

If this is your first time making a recipe from this book, please review  chapter 4,
Basic Bread Method, for a detailed discussion of techniques for mixing and folding
dough, shaping loaves, and baking.

1.  Autolyse  Combine  the  1,000  grams  of  flour  with  the  720  grams  of  90°F  to  95°F
(32°C to 35°C) water in a 12-quart round tub or similar container. Mix by hand just until
incorporated. Cover and let rest for 20 to 30 minutes.

2. Mix Sprinkle the 21 grams of salt and the 4 grams (1 level teaspoon) of yeast evenly
over the top of the dough. Mix by hand, wetting your working hand before mixing so the
dough doesn’t stick to you. (It’s fine to rewet your hand three or four times while you
mix.) Reach underneath the dough and grab about one-quarter of it. Gently stretch this
section of dough and fold it over the top to the other side of the dough. Repeat three more
times with the remaining dough, until the salt and yeast are fully enclosed.

Use the pincer method to fully integrate the ingredients. Make five or six pincer cuts
across the entire mass of dough. Then fold the dough over itself a few times. Repeat,
alternately  cutting  and  folding  until  all  of  the  ingredients  are  fully  integrated  and  the
dough has some tension in it. Let the dough rest for a few minutes, then fold for another
30  seconds  or  until  the  dough  tightens  up.  The  whole  process  should  take  about  5
minutes. The target dough temperature at the end of the mix is 77°F to 78°F (25°C to
26°C). Cover the tub and let the dough rise.

3. Fold This dough needs two folds (see here for instructions). It’s easiest to apply the
folds  during  the  first  1½  hours  after  mixing  the  dough. Apply  the  first  fold  about  10
minutes after mixing and the second fold during the next hour (when you see the dough
spread out in the tub, it’s ready for the second fold). If need be, it’s okay to fold later;
just be sure to leave it alone for the last hour of rising.

When the dough is triple its original volume, about 5 hours after mixing, it’s ready to

be divided.

4.  Divide  Moderately  flour  a  work  surface  about  2  feet  wide.  Flour  your  hands  and
sprinkle a bit of flour around the edges of the tub. Tip the tub slightly and gently work
your floured free hand beneath the dough to loosen it from the bottom of the tub. Gently
ease the dough out onto the work surface without pulling or tearing it.

With floured hands, pick up the dough and ease it back down onto the work surface in
a somewhat even shape. Dust the area in the middle, where you’ll cut the dough, with a
bit of flour. Cut the dough into 2 equal-size pieces with a dough knife or plastic dough

scraper.

5. Shape Dust 2 proofing baskets with flour. Shape each piece of dough into a medium-
tight  ball  following  the these  instructions.  Place  each  seam  side  down  in  its  proofing
basket.

6. Proof Lightly flour the tops of the loaves. Set them side by side and cover with a
kitchen towel, or place each basket in a nonperforated plastic bag.

Plan  on  baking  the  loaves  about  1¼  hours  after  they  are  shaped,  assuming  a  room
temperature  of  about  70°F  (21°C).  If  your  kitchen  is  warmer,  they  will  be  optimally
proofed  in  about  1  hour.  Use  the finger-dent test to determine when they are perfectly
proofed and ready to bake, being sure to check the loaves after 1 hour. With this bread,
15 minutes can make the difference between being perfectly proofed and collapsing a bit.

7. Preheat At least 45 minutes prior to baking, put a rack in the middle of the oven and
put 2 Dutch ovens on the rack with their lids on. Preheat the oven to 475°F (245°C).

If  you  only  have  1  Dutch  oven,  put  the  second  loaf  into  the  refrigerator  about  20
minutes before baking the first loaf and bake the loaves sequentially, giving the Dutch
oven  a  5-minute  reheat  after  removing  the  first  loaf.  Alternatively,  you  can  keep  the
second loaf in the refrigerator overnight, in its proofing basket inside a nonperforated
plastic bag, and bake it early the next morning; if you do this, put the second loaf in the
refrigerator immediately after shaping.

8. Bake For the next step, please be careful not to let your hands, fingers, or forearms
touch the extremely hot Dutch oven.

Invert the proofed loaf onto a lightly floured countertop, keeping in mind that the top of
the loaf will be the side that was facing down while it was rising—the seam side. Use
oven mitts to remove the preheated Dutch oven from the oven. Remove the lid. Carefully
place the loaf in the hot Dutch oven seam side up. Use mitts to replace the lid, then put
the Dutch oven in the oven. Maintain the temperature at 475°F (245°C).

Bake  for  30  minutes,  then  carefully  remove  the  lid  and  bake  for  about  20  more
minutes, until at least medium dark brown all around the loaf. Check after 15 minutes of
baking uncovered in case your oven runs hot.

Remove the Dutch oven and carefully tilt it to turn the loaf out. Let cool on a rack or
set  the  loaf  on  its  side  so  air  can  circulate  around  it.  Let  the  loaf  rest  for  at  least  20
minutes before slicing.

KNOW YOUR OVEN

I recommend using an oven thermometer to confirm that when you set your oven to
475ºF, you actually get 475ºF. Some ovens run hotter than their setting, and some
run cooler. (Mine runs 25ºF cooler, so when I want to heat it to 475ºF, I set it to
500ºF.)

WHAT IF THE DOUGH ISN’T AT THE TARGET TEMPERATURE?

If  the final mix temperature is cooler, don’t worry, it will just take longer to fully
rise (in this case tripling in size). If you have a warm spot where the dough can
rise,  that  will  help  make  up  for  the  cooler  dough  temperature.  If  your  dough  is
warmer, the dough will triple in size sooner. (The next time you make the recipe,
you can adjust the final mix temperature by using warmer or cooler water.)

The Saturday 75% Whole Wheat Bread

THE SATURDAY 75% WHOLE WHEAT
BREAD

If you want an easy and tasty high-fiber bread that you can make in one day, this is the
recipe for you. If you want to work with this schedule and adjust to use your own blend
of flours, take a look at the essay “Making a Bread (or Pizza) Dough You Can Call Your
Own.” The process and timeline for this bread is the same as the Saturday White Bread,
but there’s more water in this dough because whole wheat flour is more absorbent than
all-white  flour,  a  little  less  yeast  because  whole  wheat  encourages  a  more  active
fermentation than all-white flour, and a fraction more salt for taste.

This bread has much more whole wheat in it than most loaves labeled “whole wheat”
at  the  store.  It  will  also  be  more  pure,  having  just  flour,  water,  salt,  and  yeast  as
ingredients. Happily, even with 75 percent of the flour being whole grain, this recipe
makes a loaf with decent volume and a reasonable lightness of texture—don’t expect to
be baking bricks here! A baker in France might refer to this type of bread as pain  de
régime (régime being the French word for “diet”) because of its high fiber content. I like
it because it tastes great.

THIS RECIPE MAKES 2 LOAVES, EACH ABOUT 1½ POUNDS, AND IS SUITABLE FOR FOCACCIA.
BULK FERMENTATION: About 5 hours
PROOF TIME: About 1¼ hours
SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Begin at 9:30 a.m., finish mixing at 10 a.m., shape into loaves
at 3 p.m., and bake at 4:15 p.m. The bread will come out of the oven just
after 5 p.m.

INGREDIENT
Whole wheat flour
White flour
Water
Fine sea salt
Instant dried yeast

QUANTITY
750 g
250 g
800 g, 90ºF to 95ºF (32ºC to 35ºC)
22 g
3 g

 
5¾ cups + 1½ tbsp
1¾ cups + 3 tbsp
3½ cups
1 tbsp + 1 tsp
¾ tsp

BAKER’S PERCENTAGE
75%
25%
80%
2.2%
0.3%

1. Autolyse Mix the 750 grams of whole wheat flour and the 250 grams of white flour
by hand in a 12-quart round tub or similar container. Add the 800 grams of 90°F to 95°F

(32°C to 35°C) water and mix by hand just until incorporated. Cover and let rest for 20
to 30 minutes.

2. Mix Sprinkle the 22 grams of salt and the 3 grams (¾ teaspoon) of yeast evenly over
the top of the dough. Mix by hand, wetting your working hand before mixing so the dough
doesn’t stick to you. (It’s fine to rewet your hand three or four times while you mix.)
Reach underneath the dough and grab about one-quarter of it. Gently stretch this section
of dough and fold it over the top to the other side of the dough. Repeat three more times
with the remaining dough, until the salt and yeast are fully enclosed.

Use  the  pincer  method  to  fully  integrate  the  ingredients.  Using  your  thumb  and
forefinger, make five or six pincer cuts across the entire mass of dough. Then fold the
dough  over  itself  a  few  times.  Repeat,  alternately  cutting  and  folding  until  all  of  the
ingredients are fully integrated and the dough has some tension in it. Let the dough rest
for a few minutes, then fold for another 30 seconds or until the dough tightens up.

The target dough temperature at the end of the mix is 77°F to 78°F (25°C to 26°C).

Cover the tub and let the dough rise.

3.  Fold  This  dough  needs  three  gentle  folds  (see Step  3:  Fold  the  Dough  for
instructions). Whole wheat dough does not stretch as far as white flour dough, so don’t
be too aggressive with it. It’s easiest to apply the folds during the first 1½ hours after
mixing the dough. Apply the first fold about 10 minutes after mixing and the remaining
folds during the next hour (when you see the dough spread out in the tub, it’s ready for
the next fold). If need be, it’s okay to fold later; just be sure to leave it alone for the last
hour of rising.

When the dough is triple its original volume, about 5 hours after mixing, it’s ready to

be divided.

4.  Divide  Moderately  flour  a  work  surface  about  2  feet  wide.  Flour  your  hands  and
sprinkle a bit of flour around the edges of the tub. Tip the tub slightly and gently work
your floured free hand beneath the dough to loosen it from the bottom of the tub. Gently
ease the dough out onto the work surface without pulling or tearing it.

With floured hands, pick up the dough and ease it back down onto the work surface in
a somewhat even shape. Dust the area in the middle, where you’ll cut the dough, with a
bit of flour. Cut the dough into 2 equal-size pieces with a dough knife or plastic dough
scraper.

5. Shape Dust 2 proofing baskets with flour. Shape each piece of dough into a medium-
tight ball following these instructions. Place each seam side down in its proofing basket.

6. Proof Lightly flour the tops of the loaves. Set them side by side and cover with a

kitchen towel, or place each basket in a nonperforated plastic bag.

Plan  on  baking  the  loaves  about  1¼  hours  after  they  are  shaped,  assuming  a  room
temperature  of  about  70°F  (21°C).  If  your  kitchen  is  warmer,  they  will  be  optimally
proofed  in  about  1  hour.  Use the finger-dent test to determine when they are perfectly
proofed and ready to bake.

7. Preheat At least 45 minutes prior to baking, put a rack in the middle of the oven and
put 2 Dutch ovens on the rack with their lids on. Preheat the oven to 475°F (245°C).

If  you  only  have  1  Dutch  oven,  put  the  second  loaf  into  the  refrigerator  about  20
minutes before baking the first loaf and bake the loaves sequentially, giving the Dutch
oven  a  5-minute  reheat  after  removing  the  first  loaf.  Alternatively,  you  can  keep  the
second loaf in the refrigerator overnight, in its proofing basket inside a nonperforated
plastic bag, and bake it early the next morning; if you do this, put the second loaf in the
refrigerator immediately after shaping.

8. Bake For the next step, please be careful not to let your hands, fingers, or forearms
touch the extremely hot Dutch oven.

Invert the proofed loaf onto a lightly floured countertop, keeping in mind that the top of
the loaf will be the side that was facing down while it was rising—the seam side. Use
oven mitts to remove the preheated Dutch oven from the oven. Remove the lid. Carefully
place the loaf in the hot Dutch oven seam side up. Use mitts to replace the lid, then put
the Dutch oven in the oven. Maintain the temperature at 475°F (245°C).

Bake  for  30  minutes,  then  carefully  remove  the  lid  and  bake  for  about  20  more
minutes, until at least medium dark brown all around the loaf. Check after 15 minutes of
baking uncovered in case your oven runs hot.

Remove the Dutch oven and carefully tilt it to turn the loaf out. Let cool on a rack or
set  the  loaf  on  its  side  so  air  can  circulate  around  it.  Let  the  loaf  rest  for  at  least  20
minutes before slicing.

Overnight White Bread

OVERNIGHT WHITE BREAD

This is a great-tasting, crusty white bread with nice big holes. It makes me want to slice
a couple of pieces, top them with fresh slices of in-season, ripe tomatoes, cover with
good olive oil, and live, for the moment, in happy contentment. For those who have made
bread using Jim Lahey’s no-knead method, you’ll find the timing of this recipe familiar.
This is, however, a distinctly different recipe; it calls for water that’s about 30°F (17°C)
warmer  and  uses  one-third  the  amount  of  yeast.  This  recipe  also  includes  an  autolyse
period and calls for giving the dough a couple of folds after the mix. The result is two
breads with different tastes and textures, and this is a great way to demonstrate that two
seemingly similar recipes produce two different breads.

This dough rises overnight, and the extended bulk fermentation gives it more time to
develop complexity in its flavors than the two Saturday Breads (see The Saturday White
Bread  and The Saturday 775% Whole Wheat Bread). The baked loaves should have a
nice  open  interior  and  a  crisp  crust—assuming  you  bake  the  loaves  well  beyond  the
blond stage. This bread has many uses and won’t last long.

THIS RECIPE MAKES 2 LOAVES, EACH ABOUT 1½ POUNDS, AND IS SUITABLE FOR FOCACCIA OR IRON-SKILLET

PIZZA.

BULK FERMENTATION: 12 to 14 hours
PROOF TIME: About 1¼ hours
SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Mix at 7 p.m., shape into loaves at 8 a.m. the next morning,

and bake at 9:15 a.m. The bread will come out of the oven a little after 10
a.m.

INGREDIENT
White flour
Water
Fine sea salt
Instant dried yeast

QUANTITY
1,000 g
780 g, 90ºF to 95ºF (32ºC to 35ºC)
22 g
0.8 g

 
7¾ cups
3⅓ cups
1 tbsp + 1 tsp
Scant ¼ tsp

BAKER’S PERCENTAGE
100%
78%
2.2%
0.08%

1.  Autolyse  Combine  the  1,000  grams  of  flour  with  the  780  grams  of  90°F  to  95°F
(32°C to 35°C) water in a 12-quart round tub or similar container. Mix by hand just until
incorporated. Cover and let rest for 20 to 30 minutes.

2. Mix  Sprinkle  the  22  grams  of  salt  and  the  0.8  gram  (a  scant  ¼  teaspoon)  of  yeast
evenly over the top of the dough. Mix by hand, wetting your working hand before mixing
so the dough doesn’t stick to you. (It’s fine to rewet your hand three or four times while
you mix.) Reach underneath the dough and grab about one-quarter of it. Gently stretch
this section of dough and fold it over the top to the other side of the dough. Repeat three
more times with the remaining dough, until the salt and yeast are fully enclosed.

Use  the  pincer  method  to  fully  integrate  the  ingredients.  Using  your  thumb  and
forefinger, make five or six pincer cuts across the entire mass of dough. Then fold the
dough  over  itself  a  few  times.  Repeat,  alternately  cutting  and  folding  until  all  of  the
ingredients are fully integrated and the dough has some tension in it. Let the dough rest
for a few minutes, then fold for another 30 seconds or until the dough tightens up. The
target dough temperature at the end of the mix is 77°F to 78°F (25°C to 26°C). Cover the
tub and let the dough rise.

3.  Fold  This  dough  needs  two  or  three  folds  (see Step  3:  Fold  the  Dough  for
instructions). Three would be best for maximum gas retention and volume in the finished
loaf, but if you only have time to do two folds it will be fine. It’s easiest to apply the
folds during the first 1½ hours after mixing the dough. After doing the last fold, cover the
dough and let it continue to rise overnight at room temperature.

When the dough is 2½ to 3 times its original volume, 12 to 14 hours after mixing, it’s

ready to be divided.

4.  Divide  Moderately  flour  a  work  surface  about  2  feet  wide.  Flour  your  hands  and
sprinkle a bit of flour around the edges of the tub. Tip the tub slightly and gently work
your floured free hand beneath the dough to loosen it from the bottom of the tub. Gently
ease the dough out onto the work surface without pulling or tearing it.

With floured hands, pick up the dough and ease it back down onto the work surface in
a somewhat even shape. Dust the area in the middle, where you’ll cut the dough, with a
bit of flour. Cut the dough into 2 equal-size pieces with a dough knife or plastic dough
scraper.

5. Shape Dust 2 proofing baskets with flour. Shape each piece of dough into a medium-
tight ball following these instructions. Place each seam side down in its proofing basket.

6. Proof Lightly flour the tops of the loaves. Set them side by side and cover with a
kitchen towel, or place each basket in a nonperforated plastic bag.

Plan  on  baking  the  loaves  about  1¼  hours  after  they  are  shaped,  assuming  a  room
temperature  of  about  70°F  (21°C).  If  your  kitchen  is  warmer,  they  will  be  optimally
proofed  in about  1  hour.  Use the finger-dent test to determine when they are perfectly
proofed and ready to bake, being sure to check the loaves after 1 hour. With this bread,

15 minutes can make a difference between being perfectly proofed and collapsing a bit.

7. Preheat At least 45 minutes prior to baking, put a rack in the middle of the oven and
put 2 Dutch ovens on the rack with their lids on. Preheat the oven to 475°F (245°C).

If  you  only  have  1  Dutch  oven,  put  the  second  loaf  into  the  refrigerator  about  20
minutes before baking the first loaf and bake the loaves sequentially, giving the Dutch
oven a 5-minute reheat after removing the first loaf.

8. Bake For the next step, please be careful not to let your hands, fingers, or forearms
touch the extremely hot Dutch oven.

Invert the proofed loaf onto a lightly floured countertop, keeping in mind that the top of
the loaf will be the side that was facing down while it was rising—the seam side. Use
oven mitts to remove the preheated Dutch oven from the oven. Remove the lid. Carefully
place the loaf in the hot Dutch oven seam side up. Use mitts to replace the lid, then put
the Dutch oven in the oven. Maintain the temperature at 475°F (245°C).

Bake for 30 minutes, then carefully remove the lid and bake for 20 to 30 minutes, until
at  least  medium  dark  brown  all  around  the  loaf.  Check  after  15  minutes  of  baking
uncovered in case your oven runs hot.

Remove the Dutch oven and carefully tilt it to turn the loaf out. Let cool on a rack or
set  the  loaf  on  its  side  so  air  can  circulate  around  it.  Let  the  loaf  rest  for  at  least  20
minutes before slicing.

VARIATION: WEEKNIGHT WHITE BREAD

It’s  possible  to  adjust  the  timing  of  the  Overnight  White
Bread  recipe  so  it  will  work  for  somebody  with  a  day  job
during the workweek. Follow the recipe for Overnight White
Bread through step 3. Then, in the morning before going to
work, take 5 to 10 minutes to divide and shape loaves from
the dough you mixed the evening before. Put the proofing
baskets  in  plastic  bags  and  let  the  loaves  proof  slowly  in
the refrigerator while you are at work.

When you get home from work, remove the loaves from the
refrigerator  and  let  them  sit  out  on  the  counter  to  finish
proofing  while  you  preheat  the  Dutch  ovens.  If  you  get
home at 6 p.m., you will have fresh baked bread by 7:30
p.m. Note that in this variation, the bulk fermentation time
is  12  to  14  hours,  and  the  proof  time  is  about  10  hours

(depending on when you get home from work).

Overnight 40% Whole Wheat Bread

OVERNIGHT 40% WHOLE WHEAT
BREAD

My preferred ratio of whole wheat flour to white flour in a brown bread is 30 to 40
percent whole wheat. Sometimes I bake a 75 percent whole wheat bread for the extra
fiber, but from a purely gastronomic point of view, using just 30 to 40 percent gives the
flavor and texture I like best. With this ratio, the final bread has good volume and a light,
open texture, along with the nuttiness and depth of flavor whole wheat provides.

In this recipe, the shaped loaves spend the night in the refrigerator rising very slowly;
this allows the dough to develop more of the complexity of flavors that come from an
extended,  slow  rise.  We  use  this  technique  for  much  of  the  bread  we  bake  at  Ken’s
Artisan  Bakery,  especially  our  levain  breads,  but  it  works  for  straight  doughs  too,  as
here. The schedule in this recipe makes it possible for you to bake the bread early the
next morning. Baking this bread is a very nice way to begin the day, perhaps on a Sunday
morning, filling the air with baking aromas (unless you live in Eugene).

I like this bread for pretty much any use: for sandwiches, as croutons, grilled, toasted,
or just as table bread. Or try using stale pieces of this bread for savory bread pudding or
panzanella.

You can use this recipe schedule and yeast quantity as a starting point for variations
using  different  blends  of  flours.  If  you  decide  to  experiment  with  the  ratio  of  whole
wheat to white flour, keep in mind that the more whole grain flour you use, the more
water you’ll need to achieve the same dough consistency.

THIS RECIPE MAKES 2 LOAVES, EACH ABOUT 1½ POUNDS, AND IS SUITABLE FOR FOCACCIA.
BULK FERMENTATION: About 5 hours
PROOF TIME: 12 to 14 hours
SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Mix at 1 p.m., shape into loaves at 6 p.m., proof in the

refrigerator overnight, and bake at 8 a.m. the next morning. The bread will
come out of the oven a little after 8:45 a.m.

INGREDIENT
White flour
Whole wheat flour

QUANTITY
600 g
400 g

 
4⅔ cups
3 cups + 2 tbsp

BAKER’S PERCENTAGE
60%
40%

Water
Fine sea salt
Instant dried yeast

800 g, 90ºF to 95ºF (32ºC to 35ºC)
22 g
3 g

3½ cups
1 tbsp + 1 tsp
¾ tsp

80%
2.2%
0.3%

1. Autolyse Mix the 600 grams of white flour and the 400 grams of whole wheat flour
by hand in a 12-quart round tub or similar container. Add the 800 grams of 90°F to 95°F
(32°C to 35°C) water and mix by hand just until incorporated. Cover and let rest for 20
to 30 minutes.

2. Mix Sprinkle the 22 grams of salt and the 3 grams (¾ teaspoon) of yeast evenly over
the top of the dough. Mix by hand, wetting your working hand before mixing so the dough
doesn’t stick to you. (It’s fine to rewet your hand three or four times while you mix.)
Reach underneath the dough and grab about one-quarter of it. Gently stretch this section
of dough and fold it over the top to the other side of the dough. Repeat three more times
with the remaining dough, until the salt and yeast are fully enclosed.

Use  the  pincer  method  to  fully  integrate  the  ingredients.  Using  your  thumb  and
forefinger, make five or six pincer cuts across the entire mass of dough. Then fold the
dough  over  itself  a  few  times.  Repeat,  alternately  cutting  and  folding  until  all  of  the
ingredients are fully integrated and the dough has some tension in it. Let the dough rest
for a few minutes, then fold for another 30 seconds or until the dough tightens up. The
target dough temperature at the end of the mix is 77°F to 78°F (25°C to 26°C). Cover the
tub and let the dough rise.

3.  Fold  This  dough  needs  three  or  four  folds  (see Step  3:  Fold  the  Dough  for
instructions).  I  recommend  doing  all  of  the  folds  in  the  first  2  hours  after  mixing  the
dough.

When the dough is triple its original volume, about 5 hours after mixing, it’s ready to

be divided.

4.  Divide  Moderately  flour  a  work  surface  about  2  feet  wide.  Flour  your  hands  and
sprinkle a bit of flour around the edges of the tub. Tip the tub slightly and gently work
your floured free hand beneath the dough to loosen it from the bottom of the tub. Gently
ease the dough out onto the work surface without pulling or tearing it.

With floured hands, pick up the dough and ease it back down onto the work surface in
a somewhat even shape. Dust the area in the middle, where you’ll cut the dough, with a
bit of flour. Cut the dough into 2 equal-size pieces with a dough knife or plastic dough
scraper.

5. Shape Dust 2 proofing baskets with flour. Shape each piece of dough into a medium-
tight ball following these instructions. Place each seam side down in its proofing basket.

6. Proof Place each basket in a nonperforated plastic bag and refrigerate overnight.

The  next  morning,  12  to  14  hours  after  the  loaves  went  into  the  refrigerator,  they
should be expanded but not overflowing their proofing baskets. There should be about a
2-hour  window  when  the  cold  loaves,  still  in  the  refrigerator,  are  optimally  proofed.
They can go straight from the refrigerator into the oven. There is no need for or benefit in
allowing them to come to room temperature first.

7. Preheat At least 45 minutes prior to baking, put a rack in the middle of the oven and
put 2 Dutch ovens on the rack with their lids on. Preheat the oven to 475°F (245°C). The
bread can go into the oven right out of the refrigerator. There is no need for it to warm up
first.

If  you  only  have  1  Dutch  oven,  put  the  second  loaf  into  the  refrigerator  about  20
minutes before baking the first loaf and bake the loaves sequentially, giving the Dutch
oven a 5-minute reheat after removing the first loaf.

8. Bake For the next step, please be careful not to let your hands, fingers, or forearms
touch the extremely hot Dutch oven.

Invert the proofed loaf onto a lightly floured countertop, keeping in mind that the top of
the loaf will be the side that was facing down while it was rising—the seam side. Use
oven mitts to remove the preheated Dutch oven from the oven. Remove the lid. Carefully
place the loaf in the hot Dutch oven seam side up. Use mitts to replace the lid, then put
the Dutch oven in the oven. Maintain the temperature at 475°F (245°C).

Bake for 30 minutes, then carefully remove the lid and bake for 20 to 25 minutes, until
at  least  medium  dark  brown  all  around  the  loaf.  Check  after  15  minutes  of  baking
uncovered in case your oven runs hot.

Remove the Dutch oven and carefully tilt it to turn the loaf out. Let cool on a rack or
set  the  loaf  on  its  side  so  air  can  circulate  around  it.  Let  the  loaf  rest  for  at  least  20
minutes before slicing.

White Bread with 80% Biga. Field Blend #2.

CHAPTER 6
DOUGHS MADE WITH PRE-FERMENTS

WHITE BREAD WITH POOLISH

HARVEST BREAD WITH POOLISH

WHITE BREAD WITH 80% BIGA

50% WHOLE WHEAT BREAD WITH BIGA

White Bread with Poolish

WHITE BREAD WITH POOLISH

This recipe makes a palate-sparkling, almost buttery-flavored bread with a thin, crisp
crust.  Extremely  versatile,  it  can  be  used  for  sandwiches,  toast,  dinner  bread,  or
however you see fit. It also makes excellent baguettes, focaccia, and soft pizza dough. If
you have the baking stone and know how to make baguettes in your home kitchen, this is
the dough recipe to use.

To  make  this  bread,  begin  the  evening  before  baking,  hand  mixing  a  poolish—a
mixture of flour and water with just a tiny bit of yeast. This only takes a few minutes. In
the morning the poolish will be bubbly and gassy (I love its goopy texture) and ready to
be  mixed  with  the  remaining  flour,  water,  salt,  and  yeast.  There  is  no  autolyse  stage
because  after  mixing  the  poolish,  there  is  so  little  remaining  water  to  mix  with  the
remaining flour that it clumps up and cannot be worked out by hand.

I  like  shaping  this  dough  into  the fendue  shape,  taking  the  fully  proofed  loaf  and
pressing a dowel over the middle of the loaf (which is floured first) all the way to the
work  surface  to  create  a  seam  down  the  middle  (see photos).  The  lovely  result  is  a
kidney shape, with two big lobes of crusty bread joined in the middle.

THIS RECIPE MAKES 2 LOAVES, EACH ABOUT 1½ POUNDS, AND IS SUITABLE FOR PIZZA AND FOCACCIA.
POOLISH FERMENTATION: 12 to 14 hours
BULK FERMENTATION: 2 to 3 hours
PROOF TIME: About 1 hour
SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Mix the poolish at 6 p.m., mix the final dough at 8 a.m. the next

morning, shape into loaves at 11 a.m., and bake at noon.

Poolish
INGREDIENT
White flour
Water
Instant dried yeast

QUANTITY
500 g
500 g, 80ºF (27ºC)
0.4 g

 
3¾ cups + 2 tbsp
2¼ cups
Scant ⅛ tsp

Final Dough

INGREDIENT

White flour

FINAL DOUGH MIX
QUANTITY
500 g

Baker’s Formula
QUANTITY IN
POOLISH

 
3¾ cups + 2 tbsp 500 g

TOTAL RECIPE
QUANTITY
1,000 g

BAKER’S
PERCENTAGE
100%

Water
Fine sea salt

250 g, 105ºF (41ºC)
21 g

Instant dried
yeast

3 g

Poolish

1,000 g

1⅛ cups
1 tbsp + 1 scant
tsp

¾ tsp

500 g
0

0.4 g

All from recipe
above

 

750 g
21 g

3.4 g

 

75%
2.1%

0.34%

50%*

* The baker’s percentage for poolish is the amount of flour in the poolish expressed as

a percentage of the total flour in the recipe.

Pouring poolish into the final dough mix.

1. Mix the poolish The evening before you plan to bake, mix 500 grams of flour and 0.4
gram (a scant ⅛ teaspoon) of yeast by hand in a 6-quart round tub. Add 500 grams of
water at 80°F (27°C) and mix by hand until completely blended. Cover and leave out
overnight  at  room  temperature.  The  following  timeline  assumes  overnight  room
temperature is between 65°F and 70°F (18°C and 21°C).

When  fully  mature,  12  to  14  hours  later,  the  poolish  should  be  bubbly  and  about
tripled  in  volume,  with  bubbles  popping  on  the  surface  at  least  every  few  seconds.
Poolish  will  stay  at  this  peak  level  of  maturity  for  about  2  hours,  unless  your  room
temperature is warm—say, above 76°F (24°C)—in which case it will be at its peak for
just about 1 hour. At this point you can mix the final dough.

2. Mix the final dough Measure 500 grams of flour into a 12-quart round tub. Add the
21 grams of salt and 3 grams (¾ teaspoon) of yeast and mix by hand.

Pour  the  250  grams  of  105°F  (41°C)  water  around  the  perimeter  of  the  poolish,
loosening it from its tub. Then pour the water and poolish into the flour mixture in the 12-
quart tub.

Mix by hand, wetting your working hand before mixing so the dough doesn’t stick to
you.  (It’s  fine  to  rewet  your  hand  three  or  four  times  while  you  mix.) Use  the  pincer
method alternating with folding the dough to fully integrate the ingredients. Most of the

ingredients are already in the poolish and the poolish is at room temperature, so the final
mix temperature depends on  the  ambient  temperature.  For  an  overnight  temperature  of
about 67°F (19°C), the final mix temperature will probably be 74°F to 75°F (23°C to
24°C).

3. Fold This dough needs two or three folds (see Step 3: Fold the Dough). It’s best to
apply the folds during the first hour after mixing the dough.

When the dough is about 2½ times its original volume, 2 to 3 hours after mixing, it’s

ready to be divided.

4. Divide  With  floured  hands,  gently  ease  the  dough  out  of  the  tub  and  onto  a  lightly
floured work surface. With your hands still floured, pick up the dough and ease it back
down onto the work surface in a somewhat even shape. Use a bit of flour to dust the area
in the middle where you’ll cut the dough, then cut it into 2 equal-size pieces with a dough
knife or plastic dough scraper.

5. Shape Dust 2 proofing baskets with flour. Shape each piece of dough into a medium-
tight ball following these instructions. Place each seam side down in its proofing basket.

6. Proof Lightly flour the tops of the loaves. Set them side by side and cover with a
kitchen towel, or place each basket in a nonperforated plastic bag. The proof period for
this bread is only about 1 hour, so make sure to preheat the oven in time. Use the finger-
dent test to determine when the loaves are fully proofed.

7. Preheat At least 45 minutes prior to baking, put a rack in the middle of the oven and
put 2 Dutch ovens on the rack with their lids on. Preheat the oven to 475°F (245°C).

If  you  only  have  1  Dutch  oven,  put  the  second  loaf  into  the  refrigerator  about  20
minutes before baking the first loaf and bake the loaves sequentially, giving the Dutch
oven a 5-minute reheat after removing the first loaf.

8. Bake For the next step, please be careful not to let your hands, fingers, or forearms
touch the extremely hot Dutch oven.

Invert the proofed loaf onto a lightly floured countertop (moderately floured if making
the fendue shape). The seam side, now facing up, will be the top of the baked loaf. To
make  the fendue shape (which is optional), sprinkle a moderate amount of flour across
the middle of the loaf and use a 1-inch-diameter dowel to press down through the loaf all
the way to the work surface. Roll the dowel back and forth just a bit to create about 1
inch of space flattened down the middle of the loaf.

Remove  the  preheated  Dutch  oven  from  your  kitchen  oven,  remove  the  lid,  and
carefully place the loaf in the Dutch oven seam side up. Cover and bake for 30 minutes,

then uncover and bake for 20 to 30 minutes, until at least medium dark brown all around
the loaf. Check after 15 minutes of baking uncovered in case your oven runs hot.

Remove the Dutch oven and carefully tilt it to turn the loaf out. Let cool on a rack or
set  the  loaf  on  its  side  so  air  can  circulate  around  it.  Let  the  loaf  rest  for  at  least  20
minutes before slicing.

Harvest Bread with Poolish

HARVEST BREAD WITH POOLISH

This recipe has 10 percent whole wheat flour, along with wheat germ and a bit of wheat
bran. The resulting bread has aromas that remind me of wheat fields at harvest. If you
like,  you  can  coat  the  proofing  baskets  with  bran  before  placing  the  shaped  loaves
inside. The bran will adhere to the loaves and, when baked, will give the bread an extra
degree of crunch. This recipe also works well without any bran in the dough. Either way,
the poolish imparts a buttery flavor that marries well with the other ingredients.

THIS RECIPE MAKES 2 LOAVES, EACH ABOUT 1½ POUNDS, AND IS SUITABLE FOR FOCACCIA.
POOLISH FERMENTATION: 12 to 14 hours
BULK FERMENTATION: 2 to 3 hours
PROOF: About 1 hour
SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Mix the poolish at 6 p.m., mix the final dough at 8 a.m. the next

morning, shape into loaves at 11 a.m., and bake at noon.

Poolish
INGREDIENT
White flour
Water
Instant dried yeast

QUANTITY
500 g
500 g, 80ºF (27ºC)
0.4 g

 
3¾ cups + 2 tbsp
2¼ cups
Scant ⅛ tsp

FINAL DOUGH MIX
QUANTITY
400 g

 
3 cups + 2 tbsp

Baker’s Formula
QUANTITY IN
POOLISH
500 g

TOTAL RECIPE
QUANTITY
900 g

BAKER’S
PERCENTAGE
90%

100 g

¾ cup + ½ tbsp 0

280 g, 105ºF (41ºC)

Final Dough

INGREDIENT

White flour
Whole wheat
flour
Water

Fine sea salt

21 g

3 g

Instant dried
yeast
Wheat germ 50 g
20 g
Wheat bran

Poolish

1,000 g

1¼ cups
1 tbsp + 1 scant
tsp

¾ tsp

500 g

0

0.4 g

Scant ⅔ cup
⅓ cup + 1 tbsp
All from recipe
above

0
0

 

100 g

780 g

21 g

3.4 g

50 g
20 g

 

10%

78%

2.1%

0.34%

5%
2%

50%*

* The baker’s percentage for poolish is the amount of flour in the poolish expressed as

a percentage of the total flour in the recipe.

1. Mix the poolish The evening before you plan to bake, mix 500 grams of white flour
and  0.4  gram  (a  scant  ⅛  teaspoon)  of  yeast  by  hand  in  a  6-quart  round  tub. Add  500
grams of water at 80°F (27°C) and mix by hand until completely blended. Cover and
leave out overnight at room temperature. The following timeline assumes overnight room
temperature is between 65°F and 70°F (18°C and 21°C).

When  fully  mature,  12  to  14  hours  later,  the  poolish  should  be  bubbly  and  about
tripled  in  volume,  with  bubbles  popping  on  the  surface  at  least  every  few  seconds.
Poolish  will  stay  at  this  peak  level  of  maturity  for  about  2  hours,  unless  your  room
temperature is warm—say, above 76°F (24°C)—in which case it will be at its peak for
just about 1 hour. At this point you can mix the final dough.

2. Mix the final dough Measure 400 grams of white flour into a 12-quart round tub.
Add the 100 grams of whole wheat flour, 50 grams of wheat germ, 20 grams of wheat
bran, 21 grams of salt, and 3 grams (¾ teaspoon) of yeast and mix by hand.

Pour  the  280  grams  of  105°F  (41°C)  water  around  the  perimeter  of  the  poolish,
loosening it from its tub. Then pour the water and poolish into the flour mixture in the 12-
quart tub.

Mix by hand, wetting your working hand before mixing so the dough doesn’t stick to
you too much, but be aware that the germ and bran make this dough stick more than usual.
Don’t stress; just use your other hand to squeegee any dough off your mixing hand and
back into the tub. (It’s fine to rewet your hand three or four times while you mix.)

Use  the  pincer  method  alternating  with  folding  the  dough  to  fully  integrate  the
ingredients. Most of the ingredients are already in the poolish and the poolish is at room
temperature,  so  the  final  mix  temperature  depends  on  the  ambient  temperature.  For  an
overnight temperature of about 67°F, the final mix temperature will probably be 74°F to
75°F (23°C to 24°C).

3. Fold This dough needs just two folds (see Step 3: Fold the Dough). It’s best to apply
the folds during the first hour after mixing the dough. When the dough is about 2½ times
its original volume, 2 to 3 hours after mixing, it’s ready to be divided.

4. Divide  With  floured  hands,  gently  ease  the  dough  out  of  the  tub  and  onto  a  lightly
floured work surface. With your hands still floured, pick up the dough and ease it back
down onto the work surface in a somewhat even shape. Use a bit of flour to dust the area
in the middle where you’ll cut the dough, then cut it into 2 equal-size pieces with a dough

knife or plastic dough scraper.

5. Shape Dust 2 proofing baskets with flour. Shape each piece of dough into a medium-
tight ball following these instructions. Place each seam side down in its proofing basket.

If you want to coat the crust of the bread with bran, use about 10 grams of bran per
loaf  (more  than  that  won’t  adhere)  and  sprinkle  it  evenly  in  the  empty  proofing
baskets  after  dusting  them  with  flour.  Before  placing  the  loaves  in  the  proofing
baskets, roll them seam side up and lightly spritz the top (seam side) with water to
help the bran adhere. If you don’t have a spray bottle for spritzing, you can use your
hand to spread a very thin film of water over the seam side of the loaves. Put the
loaves in the baskets, seam side down as usual. The bran will adhere to the loaf
while it’s proofing.

6. Proof Lightly flour the tops of the loaves. Set them side by side and cover with a
kitchen towel, or place each basket in a nonperforated plastic bag. The proof period for
this bread is only about 1 hour, so be sure to preheat the oven in time. Use the finger-dent
test to determine when the loaves are fully proofed.

7. Preheat At least 45 minutes prior to baking, put a rack in the middle of the oven and
put 2 Dutch ovens on the rack with their lids on. Preheat the oven to 475°F (245°C).

If you only have 1 Dutch oven, put the second loaf in the refrigerator about 20 minutes
before baking the first loaf and bake the loaves sequentially, giving the Dutch oven a 5-
minute reheat after removing the first loaf.

8. Bake For the next step, please be careful not to let your hands, fingers, or forearms
touch the extremely hot Dutch oven.

Invert the proofed loaf onto a lightly floured countertop, keeping in mind that the top of

the loaf will be the side that was facing down while it was rising—the seam side.

Remove the preheated Dutch oven from your kitchen oven. Remove the lid, carefully
place  the  loaf  in  the  Dutch  oven  seam  side  up.  Cover  and  bake  for  30  minutes,  then
uncover and bake for 20 minutes, or until at least medium dark brown all around the loaf.
(If you coated the loaves with bran, it’s okay for the bran to take on a deep color, and
you want to bake the loaves as long as possible to get the crispest crust.) Check after 15
minutes of baking uncovered in case your oven runs hot.

Remove the Dutch oven and carefully tilt it to turn the loaf out. Let cool on a rack or

set  the  loaf  on  its  side  so  air  can  circulate  around  it.  Let  the  loaf  rest  for  at  least  20
minutes before slicing.

White Bread With 80% Biga

WHITE BREAD WITH 80% BIGA

Eighty percent of this recipe’s total flour is pre-fermented! How cool is that? It is fun
when you mix the final dough the next morning, and all you have to use is 200 grams of
flour and a little bit of water, salt, and yeast, then dump in the gassy, odorific biga. You
may  think,  “Is  this  really  going  to  work?”  That’s  natural—and  the  doorway  to  a  fun
experiment in baking bread.

A biga imparts a distinctive kind of earthiness to the flavor of the bread, so what if
you want more of that? This recipe is the answer. It provides a tasty example of how you
can push the boundaries with pre-fermented doughs in recipes. Note that this biga is a
stiff dough, so mixing it is a little more work than usual, but it takes just a few minutes.

I encourage you to bake one loaf from this recipe and use the remaining dough to make
pizza or focaccia. Its round flavors are very satisfying in a flat bread with toppings. For
pizza, divide the remaining dough and follow any of the pizza recipes in chapter 14; for
focaccia, you’ll find guidelines on amounts of dough in the section “Making  Focaccia
with Bread Dough”. Shape the dough into balls and let them rest in the refrigerator for
several hours or up to a couple of days.

THIS RECIPE MAKES 2 LOAVES, EACH ABOUT 1½ POUNDS, AND IS SUITABLE FOR PIZZA OR FOCACCIA.
BIGA FERMENTATION: 12 to 14 hours
BULK FERMENTATION: 2½ to 3½ hours
PROOF TIME: About 1 hour
SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Mix the biga at 6 p.m., mix the final dough at 8 a.m. the next

morning, shape into loaves at 11 a.m., and bake at about noon.

Biga
INGREDIENT
White flour
Water
Instant dried yeast

QUANTITY
800 g
544 g, 80ºF (27ºC)
0.64 g

 
6¼ cups
2⅓ cup
3/16 tsp

Final Dough

INGREDIENT

White flour

FINAL DOUGH MIX
QUANTITY
200 g

Baker’s Formula
QUANTITY IN
 
BIGA
1½ cups + 1 tbsp 800 g

TOTAL RECIPE
QUANTITY
1,000 g

BAKER’S
PERCENTAGE
100%

206 g, 105ºF (41ºC)
22 g

⅞ cup
1 tbsp + 1 tsp

Water
Fine sea salt
Instant dried
yeast

Biga

2 g

1,345 g

544 g
0

0.64 g

½ tsp

All from recipe
above

 

750 g
22 g

2.64 g

 

75%
2.2%

0.26%

80%*

* The baker’s percentage for biga is the amount of flour in the biga expressed as a

percentage of the total flour in the recipe.

1. Mix the biga The evening before you plan to bake, put 800 grams of flour in a 6-
quart tub. Put 544 grams of water at 80°F (27°C) in a separate container. Put 0.64 grams
(3/16 teaspoon) of yeast in a separate, small container. Add about 3 tablespoons of the
80°F (27°C) water to the yeast. Let the mixture rest for a few minutes, then stir with your
finger; the yeast may not be completely dissolved, but you’ve given it a good start.

Pour the yeast mixture into the tub with the flour. Pour a few more tablespoons of the
80°F (27°C) water into the yeast container, swirl it around to incorporate any remaining
yeast, and dump it into the dough tub, along with the remaining warm water.

Mix by hand, using the pincer method alternating with folding the dough, just until all
of the ingredients are incorporated. Cover and leave out overnight at room temperature.
The following timeline assumes overnight room temperature is between 65°F and 70°F
(18°C and 21°C).

When  fully  mature,  12  to  14  hours  later,  the  biga  should  be  slightly  domed,  about
tripled in volume, and pocked with gas bubbles and have a strong, ripe smell of alcohol.
At this point you can mix the final dough.

2. Mix the final dough Measure 200 grams of flour into a 12-quart round tub, add the
22 grams of salt and 2 grams (½ teaspoon) of yeast, and mix by hand. Pour in the 206
grams of 105°F (41°C) water and mix by hand just until incorporated. Add all of the
biga, using your hand to ease it out of its container.

Mix by hand, wetting your working hand before mixing so the dough doesn’t stick to
you.  (It’s  fine  to  rewet  your  hand  three  or  four  times  while  you  mix.) Use  the  pincer
method alternating with folding the dough to fully integrate the ingredients. Most of the
dough  is  the  biga  and  the  biga  is  at  room  temperature,  so  the  final  mix  temperature
depends on the ambient temperature. For an overnight temperature of about 67°F (19°C),
the  final  mix  temperature  probably  won’t  be  much  higher  than  74°F  (23°C).  For  this
bread, that will be fine, although a final mix temperature of 78°F to 80°F (26°C to 27°C)
would be ideal. For a final mix temperature of 74°F (23°C), bulk dough fermentation
will take about 3½ hours; for a final mix temperature of 78°F to 80°F (26°C to 27°C), it
will probably take 2½ to 3 hours.

3. Fold This dough needs two or three folds (see Step 3: Fold the Dough). It’s best to
apply the folds during the first 1½ hours after mixing the dough. When the dough is about
triple its original volume, 2½ to 3 hours after mixing, it’s ready to be divided.

4. Divide  With  floured  hands,  gently  ease  the  dough  out  of  the  tub  and  onto  a  lightly
floured work surface. With your hands still floured, pick up the dough and ease it back
down onto the work surface in a somewhat even shape. Use a bit of flour to dust the area
in the middle where you’ll cut the dough, then cut it into 2 equal-size pieces with a dough
knife or plastic dough scraper.

5. Shape Dust 2 proofing baskets with flour. Shape each piece of dough into a medium-
tight ball following these instructions. Place each seam side down in its proofing basket.

6. Proof Lightly flour the tops of the loaves. Set them side by side and cover with a
kitchen towel, or place each basket in a nonperforated plastic bag. The proof period for
this bread is only about 1 hour, so make sure to preheat the oven in time. Use the finger-
dent test to determine when the loaves are fully proofed.

7. Preheat At least 45 minutes prior to baking, put a rack in the middle of the oven and
put 2 Dutch ovens on the rack with their lids on. Preheat the oven to 475°F (245°C).

If you only have 1 Dutch oven, put the second loaf in the refrigerator about 20 minutes
before baking the first loaf and bake the loaves sequentially, giving the Dutch oven a 5-
minute reheat after removing the first loaf.

8. Bake For the next step, please be careful not to let your hands, fingers, or forearms
touch the extremely hot Dutch oven.

Invert the proofed loaf onto a lightly floured countertop, keeping in mind that the top of

the loaf will be the side that was facing down while it was rising—the seam side.

Remove  the  preheated  Dutch  oven  from  your  kitchen  oven,  remove  the  lid,  and
carefully place the loaf in the Dutch oven seam side up. Cover and bake for 30 minutes,
then uncover and bake for 20 to 30 minutes, until at least medium dark brown all around
the loaf. Check after 15 minutes of baking uncovered in case your oven runs hot.

Remove the Dutch oven and carefully tilt it to turn the loaf out. Let cool on a rack or
set  the  loaf  on  its  side  so  air  can  circulate  around  it.  Let  the  loaf  rest  for  at  least  20
minutes before slicing.

50% WHOLE WHEAT BREAD WITH
BIGA

This recipe uses a biga to make whole wheat bread. I like the way the earthiness of the
biga complements the flavors of the bran and wheat germ present in whole wheat flour.
And there’s the fiber benefit, too. This is an excellent sandwich bread. It’s great for toast
and croutons, and I like whole wheat bread with fresh cheese or with butter and honey. It
is excellent with liver mousses or pâtés, and maybe apricot preserves on the side. Toss
on some crushed pistachios if you have them. Boy howdy!

THIS RECIPE MAKES 2 LOAVES, EACH ABOUT 1½ POUNDS, AND IS SUITABLE FOR FOCACCIA.
BIGA FERMENTATION: 12 to 14 hours
BULK FERMENTATION: 3 to 4 hours
PROOF TIME: About 1 hour
SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Mix the biga at 6 p.m., mix the final dough at 8 a.m. the next

morning, shape into loaves at 11 a.m., and bake at noon.

Biga
INGREDIENT
White flour
Water
Instant dried yeast

QUANTITY
500 g
340 g, 80ºF (27ºC)
0.4 g

 
3¾ cups + 2 tbsp
1½ cups
Scant ⅛ tsp

FINAL DOUGH MIX
QUANTITY
0

 
0

Baker’s Formula
QUANTITY IN
BIGA
500 g

TOTAL RECIPE
QUANTITY
500 g

BAKER’S
PERCENTAGE
50%

Final Dough

INGREDIENT

White flour
Whole wheat
flour
Water
Fine sea salt
Instant dried
yeast

Biga

3 g

840 g

500 g

3¾ cups + 2 tbsp 0

460 g, 100ºF (38ºC)
22 g

2 cups
1 tbsp + 1 tsp

340 g
0

0.4 g

¾ tsp

All from recipe
above

 

500 g

800 g
22 g

3.4 g

 

50%

80%
2.2%

0.34%

50%*

* The baker’s percentage for biga is the amount of flour in the biga expressed as a

percentage of the total flour in the recipe.

1. Mix the biga The evening before you plan to bake, put 500 grams of flour in a 6-
quart tub. Put 340 grams of water at 80°F (27°C) in a separate container. Put 0.4 grams
(a scant ⅛ teaspoon) of yeast in a separate, small container. Add about 3 tablespoons of
the 80°F (27°C) water to the yeast. Let the mixture rest for a few minutes, then stir with
your finger; the yeast may not be completely dissolved, but you’ve given it a good start.

Pour the yeast mixture into the tub with the flour. Pour a few more tablespoons of the
80°F (27°C) water into the yeast container, swirl it around to incorporate any remaining
yeast, and dump it into the dough tub, along with the remaining warm water.

Mix by hand, using the pincer method alternating with folding the dough, just until all
of the ingredients are incorporated. Cover and leave out overnight at room temperature.
The following timeline assumes overnight room temperature is between 65°F and 70°F
(18°C and 21°C).

When  fully  mature,  12  to  14  hours  later,  the  biga  should  be  slightly  domed,  about
tripled in volume, and pocked with gas bubbles and have a ripe smell of alcohol. At this
point you can mix the final dough.

2. Mix the final dough Measure 500 grams of whole wheat flour into a 12-quart round
tub. Add the 22 grams of salt and 3 grams (¾ teaspoon) of yeast and mix by hand. Pour in
the 460 grams of 100°F (38°C) water and mix by hand just until incorporated. Add the
biga, using your hand to ease it out of its container.

Mix by hand, wetting your working hand before mixing so the dough doesn’t stick to
you.  (It’s  fine  to  rewet  your  hand  three  or  four  times  while  you  mix.) Use  the  pincer
method  alternating  with  folding  the  dough  to  fully  integrate  the  ingredients.  The  target
dough temperature at the end of the mix is 80°F (27°C).

3. Fold This dough needs three or four folds (see Step 3: Fold the Dough). It’s best to
apply the folds during the first 1½ hours after mixing the dough.

When the dough is about triple its original volume, 3 to 4 hours after mixing, it’s ready

to be divided.

4. Divide  With  floured  hands,  gently  ease  the  dough  out  of  the  tub  and  onto  a  lightly
floured work surface. With your hands still floured, pick up the dough and ease it back
down onto the work surface in a somewhat even shape. Use a bit of flour to dust the area
in the middle where you’ll cut the dough, then cut it into 2 equal-size pieces with a dough
knife or plastic dough scraper.

5. Shape Dust 2 proofing baskets with flour. Shape each piece of dough into a medium-
tight  ball  following these  instructions.  Place  each  seam  side  down  in  its  flour-dusted
proofing basket.

6. Proof Lightly flour the tops of the loaves. Set them side by side and cover with a
kitchen towel, or place each basket in a nonperforated plastic bag. The proof period for
this bread is only about 1 hour, so make sure to preheat the oven in time. Use the finger-
dent test to determine when the loaves are fully proofed.

7. Preheat At least 45 minutes prior to baking, put a rack in the middle of the oven and
put 2 Dutch ovens on the rack with their lids on. Preheat the oven to 475°F (245°C).

If you only have 1 Dutch oven, put the second loaf in the refrigerator about 20 minutes
before baking the first loaf and bake the loaves sequentially, giving the Dutch oven a 5-
minute reheat after removing the first loaf.

8. Bake For the next step, please be careful not to let your hands, fingers, or forearms
touch the extremely hot Dutch oven.

Invert the proofed loaf onto a lightly floured countertop, keeping in mind that the top of

the loaf will be the side that was facing down while it was rising—the seam side.

Remove  the  preheated  Dutch  oven  from  your  kitchen  oven,  remove  the  lid,  and
carefully place the loaf in the Dutch oven seam side up. Cover and bake for 30 minutes,
then uncover and bake for 20 to 25 minutes, until at least medium dark brown all around
the loaf. Check after 15 minutes of baking uncovered in case your oven runs hot.

Remove the Dutch oven and carefully tilt it to turn the loaf out. Let cool on a rack or
set  the  loaf  on  its  side  so  air  can  circulate  around  it.  Let  the  loaf  rest  for  at  least  20
minutes before slicing.

The Early Morning Bread Baker’s Routine

For the first several years after opening the bakery, this was me three or four days a
week. On the other days I worked the afternoon bread baker’s shift, which meant I
was  responsible  for  mixing  the  levain  doughs,  baking  the  afternoon  batch  of
baguettes and brioches, dividing and shaping the levain breads for morning baking,
mixing  the  pre-ferments  (poolish  and  biga)  for  the  next  morning’s  baguette  and
ciabatta mixes, mixing the late afternoon levain, and then sweeping and locking up.
On top of working either the morning or afternoon shift, I also did bread deliveries
on Sundays and Mondays and was always on call if anything came up. Some days I
baked pastries or rolled croissants, and I worked the counter when the line backed
up. Meanwhile I had to find time to take care of office tasks: production scheduling,
wholesale account management, bookkeeping, and personnel management. Once a
month I drove across town to Hair of the Dog brewery to pick up a bucket of spent
grains (and to have a quick glass of Fred) from owner and brewer Alan Sprints, to
use in the bakery’s rye bread. Dough is always moving. Finding the twenty or thirty
minutes needed to run any errand was a mad dash. Where is the pause button?!

As the bakery grew I could afford to hire more bakers. Gradually I was able to
remove myself from many of the day-to-day production tasks, thanks to a staff that
can handle the workload and maintain the bakery’s high standards for quality. Most
of  my  staff  work  eight  hours  straight,  without  breaks  except  for  the  occasional
smoke or quick bite to eat.

Here’s  the  schedule  of  the  last  early  morning  bread  baking  shift  I  worked. As
you’ll see from reading through it, the activities are nonstop, and the shifts continue
that way to this day.

3:30 A.M.: Arrive at the bakery. Turn the oven up to 500°F. Check the tubs of poolish
and biga for the morning mixes to see if they’re at their ideal point of maturation
and ready to be used in the dough mixes.

Remove  sheet  pans  of  croissants  and  other viennoiserie  products  for  the
morning’s  bake  from  the  refrigerator  and  the  retarder.  Set  up  a  rack  with  the
croissants  for  proofing  so  they’ll  be  ready  for  the  pastry  team  to  begin  baking
around 6 a.m. If it’s chilly in the bakery, put the rack in front of the oven.

Remove  50-pound  bags  of  flour  from  the  retarder,  where  they  were  chilled
overnight to allow for a proper finished dough temperature in the heat of the bakery
(friction from the dough mixer adds heat to the dough too).

4  A.M.:  Autolyse  the  baguette  dough.  Scale  the  flour,  usually  60  to  80  kilos
(depending on what is specified on today’s mix sheets) and dump it in the mixer.
Carry  big  buckets  of  cold  water  between  my  legs  (it’s  not  graceful)  from  the
refrigerator  to  the  mixer.  If  it’s  hot,  add  some  ice  to  keep  the  dough  mix  from
warming up too much—break up the ice with a knife steel. Scale the ice and water
to the amount on the day’s mix sheet and dump it into the mixer. We use dough tubs
that hold a little more than 20 kilos of water—the groggy baker will learn to use the
same increments each day, so if, for example, 42.4 kilos of water are needed for
this baguette mix, then I use an empty tub on the scale filled to 20 kilos twice, then
add the final 2.4 kilos. Turn the mixer on to low speed and mix for about 1 minute.
Then run the mixer in reverse for 5 or 10 seconds to pick up any dry flour from the
bottom of the bowl.

Turn off the mixer. Set a timer for 20 minutes. Go into the office and put on some

music. Make a coffee.

4:15 A.M.: Scale out yeast and salt for the baguette mix and the ciabatta mix. Dump the
poolish, mixed the previous afternoon, into the bread mixer. Depending on the day
and the size of the mix, that’s between three and six tubs of poolish, which should
be at its optimum point at this time in the morning: with hundreds of small bubbles
that give the top surface the appearance of tapioca. If you stare at it, you can see
occasional  little  eruptions  as  bubbles  pop  on  the  surface.  The  classic  French
method for removing the poolish is to reserve some of the water for the mix to pour
around the edges and loosen the poolish from its container, but I find it slides into
the mixing bowl easily enough, especially with a little encouragement from a hand
and a plastic dough scraper. Add the fresh yeast and salt.

4:25 A.M.: Begin the baguette mix, on first speed. Set timer for 5 minutes. Take empty
poolish tubs to the dish pit and rinse them out. Grab a bunch of empty dough tubs
and a bar towel, take them to the baker’s bench, and oil the seven or more dough
tubs needed for the finished baguette dough.

4:30  A.M.:  Timer  goes  off.  Change  the  mixer  to  second  speed  and  set  timer  for  4
minutes.

4:35 A.M.: Baguette mix done. Check dough temperature with a probe thermometer—it
should be about 75°F. Transfer to the oiled dough tubs, 14 kilos of dough per tub.
Put tubs of dough in the retarder for the afternoon baguette bake, in accordance with
the  day’s  mix  sheet.  Record  the  mix  temperature  and  the  time  the  mix  was
completed on the mix sheet. Plan on cutting the dough set aside for the morning bake
around 6:15 a.m.

4:45 A.M.: Feed the levain, which was last mixed the previous afternoon and is now
bubbly, acidic, leathery smelling, and generally nasty. First, throw all but a small
amount from the levain into the trash. We handle the levain at this stage wearing
food  safety  gloves  because  the  acidity  of  the  levain  can  wear  out  the  skin  in
sensitive  spots  (I  used  to  get  small  lesions  and  splits  on  my  fingertips).  The
remaining fistful of levain hardly looks like it could initiate the leavening of several
hundred loaves of bread, but it does—yeast puts rabbits to shame. Add a few kilos
of flour and very warm water to the tub and mix the levain by hand.

4:55  A.M.: Autolyse the ciabatta dough. Once again waddle with tubs of cold water
from  the  fridge  to  the  mixer  and  carry  chilled  50-pound  bags  of  flour  from  the

retarder. Pretend to listen to Rollie, the dairy guy who always shows up about now
and starts telling me stories when I’m tired and want to stay focused on my work.
Think, Rollie’s a great guy. I wish he’d shut up . Scale out amounts of flour and
water  in  accordance  with  formula  sheets  prepared  the  day  before.  Mix  on  first
speed until the water and flour are incorporated.

5:00  A.M.:  Begin  baking  levain  breads  (Country  Blonde,  Country  Brown,  the  big
boules, and walnut bread), which were shaped the previous afternoon and spent the
night slowly proofing in the retarder. For the next 20 minutes, load 144 regular-size
levain loaves into the oven.

5:25  A.M.:  Begin  the  ciabatta  mix.  To  the  flour  and  water  that  was  mixed  in  the
autolyse, add several tubs of biga—pre-fermented dough that gives the ciabatta its
great  flavor—plus  the  dry  yeast  and  salt,  and  start  the  mix  on  first  speed.  Set  a
timer.

(We use fresh baker’s yeast for the baguette dough and SAF Red Instant yeast for
our ciabatta dough, in part because it keeps the morning baker from getting confused
about which pair of yeast and salt bowls, scaled out earlier, goes into each mix.
Never underestimate the ability of a foggy early morning brain to make a mistake.
There isn’t a lot of time for reflection.)

Check the breads in the oven. Turn the oven temperature down to 480°F.
Remove  the  raisin-pecan  dough  from  the  retarder  and  divide  it  into  about  two
dozen pieces, each scaled to 475 grams. Shape them into little torpedoes. Place the
pieces on proof boards and put them in a covered rack.

Check the ciabatta dough, switch the mixer to second speed, and reset the timer.
Generously oil seven or eight tubs for the ciabatta dough, which is wet and sticky
and requires a few folds during fermentation to build up strength. Not enough oil in
the  tubs  before  they receive  the  dough  dooms  the  baker  to  a  challenge  of  dough
sticking to the tubs when there’s just not much time to deal with it.

Remove the baked bread from the first and second decks of the oven.

5:45 A.M.: Shape the raisin-pecan dough into loaves.

6:00 A.M.: Check the remaining bread in the oven. Finish the ciabatta mix and check
the dough temperature.

If the loaves in the third and fourth decks of the oven aren’t quite ready, remove
the ciabatta dough from the big mixer bowl and cut and weigh it into the oiled tubs.

Although this 10-minute task is best done from start to finish without stopping, the
timing doesn’t always allow that. If there is a 5-minute window before I need to go
back to the oven, I’ll take it. To remove this dough from the mixer, I wet my left arm
completely (the sink’s right there), reach inside the mixing bowl to lift a big hunk of
dough,  and  with  the  other  hand  wielding  the  bread  knife,  cut  the  dough  cleanly
where it is still attached to the rest—all the while being careful not to let the dough
tear. Put about 7 kilos of dough in each tub (more than that will overflow the bin
because it expands over three times when it rises). Stack the tubs on a rolling cart
next to the baker’s bench. I would usually end up running back and forth: from the
mixer,  removing  the  dough,  interrupted  by  the  sound  of  the  timer;  to  the  oven  to
check the bread, and if ready, pull it out.

Having left enough ciabatta dough in the mixer for our multigrain bread, add the
grain  mixture  and  incorporate.  Remove  this  dough  to  a  separate  oiled  dough  tub.
Scrape out the mixing bowl completely, leaving no bits of dough behind.

Reload  the  entire  oven.  Since  the  baguette  dough  needs  me  to  hit  it  when  it’s
ready 6:15 a.m., not when I’m ready for it, sometimes the second load of the oven
just needs to be done fast and that’s when the overdrive gear kicks in. When it’s
time to move fast, well, fast it is.

6:15 A.M.: Begin dividing the baguettes. We do this by hand. Flour the baker’s bench,
invert a tub of dough over it, and use a scraper to gently ease the dough out of the
tub and onto the bench. Next to the dough is a scale. Tamp off any excess oil from
the dough using a bar towel, toss some flour on top of the dough, cut with a bench
knife,  and  manually  scale  each  piece  of  dough.  Many  bakeries  use  a  piece  of
equipment called a divider to automate this process, often with excellent results, but
I have always preferred to divide and shape our doughs the old fashioned way, by
hand.

6:45 A.M.: Put a fold in each tub of ciabatta dough. Put a fold in the tub of levain.

Check the oven and remove the finished levain breads. The levain bake should be
finished at this point: big 3-kilo boules of Country Blonde, 2-kilo boules of Country
Brown (reminiscent of pain Poilâne), bâtard loaves of Country Brown and Country
Blonde, demi baguettes of Country Blonde for one of our restaurants, walnut bread,
and small loaves of walnut, Country Blonde, and Country Brown.

6:55  A.M.: Start shaping the baguettes. A good baker can divide, rest, and shape at
least one hundred baguettes in an hour. While this requires a steady and fast pair of

hands and continuous effort without pause, it also gives me my first chance to relax
a  bit. All  of  the  morning  mixes  are  done,  the  doughs  are  rising  in  their  tubs,  the
levain  bread  is  baked  and  out  of  the  oven,  and  hopefully  everything  is  right  on
schedule. It feels good to be able to shape baguettes and do nothing else for a while,
without having to stop to engage in another coincident activity. Of course, there are
over one hundred baguettes to shape.

7:45  A.M.:  Feed  the  levain  again.  Check  the  production  schedule  to  see  how  much
levain needs to be mixed today. Measure out the amount needed from the first levain
mix, throw the rest away, and mix this feeding of the levain in the bread mixer.

Put a second fold in each tub of ciabatta dough.

7:55 A.M.: Begin baking the baguettes, preferably a little earlier. We need baguettes
for our early-morning customers and for a jambon sandwich we make that is very
popular  (buttered ficelle  with  a  small  amount  of  sliced  ham  and  a  slice  of  good
cheese—especially  satisfying  because  the  flavors  of  all  the  ingredients  are  in
balance and the bread has a sparkling kind of flavor if eaten early enough, while it’s
still  very  fresh).  My  biggest  stress  point  is  having  the  baguettes  come  out  of  the
oven in time to cool before we have to bag them and get out the door with the first
round of morning deliveries. We can’t bag hot bread because it ruins it, causing the
crust to go limp from the bread’s own steam.

8:45 A.M.: Finish baking the baguettes. Clean up around the oven and rack the couches
to dry. (Couches are pieces of linen fabric that we use to support the shaped loaves
—baguettes, boules,  and bâtards—while  they  rise.  They  absorb  some  of  the
dampness of the bread dough, and it’s best to dry them out before using them again.)

9:00  A.M.: Cut the ciabatta (my favorite dough to handle and bake) into loaves and
buns.  Now  that  the  7  kilos  of  ciabatta  dough  in  each  tub  has  tripled  in  size,  the
dough is sticking to the lids. Invert a tub onto the heavily floured baker’s bench and,
because I oiled the tubs so generously back at about 5:40 a.m., the dough pops right
out. The dough holds the shape of the tub, thanks to the folds I gave it during its rise.
Cut  the  dough,  which  has  the  texture  of  bubbly,  gassy  Jell-O,  into  6-inch-wide
loaves 14 to 16 inches long for retail and about 2½ feet long for restaurants. Put the
shaped loaves on moderately floured couches to proof.

9:30 A.M.: Sweep up around the bread bench. Mix the brioche dough.

10:15  A.M.:  Begin  baking  the  ciabatta,  loading  them  into  a  very  hot  oven,  at  nearly
500°F. The unscored loaves naturally crack open along fissures, giving them a nice
organic appearance.

11:15 A.M.: Out of the oven and on the cooling rack, the baked ciabatta loaves crackle
in a loud staccato, sounding like drummer boys in the woodwork.

Clean up around the oven and say hello to the rest of the day.

THE PHYSICAL PLANT

Ken’s Artisan Bakery has an open kitchen that takes up about 1,200 square feet, a
counter,  a  750-square-foot  café  space  with  ten  small  tables  and  one  big  family
table, and a 6 by 8-foot room that serves as office, locker room, storage, and home
to the sound system. In the office there is a desk, one chair, the safe, about forty
pairs  of  shoes,  knapsacks,  jackets,  hats,  scarves,  my  bookshelf,  a  big  bottle  of
ibuprofen,  a  first  aid  kit,  lots  of  Band-Aids,  office  drawers,  the  computer  and
monitor, the printer, the iPod dock and amplifier, printer paper, spare lightbulbs, a
trash can, and our wine inventory, usually consisting of about five cases of wine—
oh, and the water heater.

The primary bread station houses the baker’s bench, the bread mixer, a hand sink,
stacks of flour bags, and a plastic folder holder on the wall with the levain feeding
details, daily mix sheets, and formula sheets for croissant and brioche doughs. The
mixer at work is a beautiful thing to watch. I can mix up to 135 kilos (almost 300

pounds) of dough at a time. Next to the mixer is a cart that holds a scale, a long
serrated knife used to cut dough coming out of the mixer, and a couple of flexible
bench knives, one with a straight edge for cutting dough, and the other with a curved
edge for scraping out the mixer bowl.

The oven is on the other side of the bakery, about fifteen paces away. In the morning
sometimes  we  run  back  and  forth,  tending  to  bread  in  the  oven  and  dough  in  the
mixer, feeding the levain, putting folds in the dough, and accepting deliveries from
the dairy guy or the eggs lady, tracking footprints of flour with each dash.

PART 3
LEVAIN BREAD RECIPES

CHAPTER 7
UNDERSTANDING LEVAIN

N

atural yeast, in its many varieties, is pretty much everywhere—in the air, in the soil,
in  vegetation—and  especially  in  carbohydrate-rich  environments  like  the  skins  of
fruits  and  the  surface  of  grains. Natural  yeasts  lie  dormant  in  flour. Commercial
baker’s yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, is a monoculture—a single strain of yeast

cultivated commercially and sold in dried form or in moist cakes.

Prior  to  the  use  of  commercial  monoculture  yeasts  in  the  modern  era,  all  leavened
bread got its rise from naturally occurring yeast. These types of breads are now known
as sourdough in the United States. This is how bread was leavened throughout most of its
five thousand years of history.

The  French  word levain  is  derived  from  the  Latin levare,  meaning  “to  rise.”  The
words mother, chef,  and levain all describe the same thing: a natural culture the baker
uses as a leavening source. Some bakers and texts use different names for the culture at
different  stages;  or  they  may  use  more  than  one  culture. Chef  often  refers  to  a  master
culture that is fed separately, whereas starter refers to a portion of the chef that is fed in
one or more stages and added to the final dough mix. I have always worked with a single
culture that is fed and kept separately, taking some of that culture at a particular point of
ripeness to leaven my final bread dough. I use the word levain to describe my culture at
all of its stages, and that’s the word I use throughout this book. I use the English word
leaven as a verb.

I  avoid  referring  to  my  naturally  leavened  breads  as  sourdough  because  too  many
people  associate  sourdough  with  breads  that  are  indeed  sour  in flavor  and  sometimes
leave  a  sharp,  vinegary  aftertaste.  In  France,  sour  bread  is  probably  considered  a
fermentation  mistake,  while  in  San  Francisco,  it’s  a  well-appreciated  taste—although
that  may  be  changing.  My  preference  is  for  complex  flavors  from  the  grain  and
fermentation that are subtle, in balance, and not sour.

A levain can support multiple strains of wild yeast, giving the baker an opportunity to
create bread and other leavened baked goods with complex aromas and flavors. Such
breads also have a more extended shelf life than breads made from commercial baker’s
yeast.  The  yeast  community  in  a  levain  culture  consists  of  billions  of  rapidly
reproducing, gas-belching, single-celled organisms. I like knowing that I can make them

do what I want them to do.

Bakers feed their levain cultures anywhere from once a day to every few hours. In the
following pages, I’ll show you how easy it is to start a new levain culture from scratch
using just flour and water and following a once-a-day feeding schedule. Then I’ll explain
how  to  feed  an  established  levain,  how  to  store  it  in  the  refrigerator  if  you  won’t  be
baking with it every day, and how to restore it for its next use.

MANIPULATING FLAVOR

Baking with a levain culture is a fermentation craft similar in some ways to making wine
from grapes and their naturally occurring yeasts: each manipulates fermentation to create
an end product that meets a desired flavor profile and degree of complexity.

The character of a naturally leavened bread depends on a number of variables: how
much water is in the culture, the temperature of the water used each time the culture is
fed,  the  type  of  flour,  the  ratio  of  levain  to  new  flour  each  time  the  culture  is  fed  or
refreshed, the feeding schedule, the temperature at which the levain is kept, how ripe the
levain is, and how much of the levain is used in the final dough. The aroma, flavor, and
appearance of levain breads and the consistency of the product from one day to the next
are all expressions of the baker’s craft—his or her signature, in a sense. A true artisan
baker  is  someone  who  understands  how  to  manipulate  the  relatively  small  number  of
variables (which can yield an infinite number of possible results) to produce exactly the
bread  desired.  In  this  book,  I’ll  give  you  specific  instructions  for  making  and  using  a
natural levain culture my way, and then I’ll explain how to adjust the variables to suit
your own tastes. Levain breads have the potential to be the most personal breads a baker
makes.

The complexity of tastes in a levain bread arise from the community of wild yeasts
and bacteria in the culture, fermentation gases, lactic and acetic acids, and, of course,
time for these things to accumulate. My revelation “less yeast and more time” definitely
applies  here.  Lengthening  the  fermentation  time  of  levain  doughs  by  retarding  them  at
cooler  temperatures greatly improves flavor. So does using smaller amounts of levain
and  allowing  doughs  to  ferment  for  a  very  long  time  at  room  temperature.  Bacterial
fermentation  and  acidity  add  desirable  tastes  and  aromas,  but  only  if  enough  time  is
allowed for these very complex biochemical reactions to take place.

Acids are responsible for the sourness in sourdough. The vinegary taste comes largely
from  acetic  acid.  Lactic  acids  are  common  in  milk,  and  indeed  contribute  a  milky  or
buttery taste to breads. Both acids are often more evident as an aftertaste, unless the sour
character  is  strong  and  pronounced.  Many  naturally  leavened  breads  have  a  flavor
profile that leans more toward one end of the acetic-lactic spectrum than the other. San

Francisco  sourdough  is  an  excellent  example  of  bread  with  strong  acetic  character—
think “vinegary.” Levain cultures kept in cooler temperatures also lean toward the acetic
end of the taste spectrum, as do stiffer levains. Bread made from a liquid levain, with
equal parts flour and water (it has a soupy texture), has a distinctive flavor profile that
leans toward the lactic acid end of the taste spectrum. Warmer levain cultures encourage
lactic  acid  production,  and  just  like  the  top-fermented  ales  that  brewers  ferment  at
warmer  temperatures,  these  can  produce  fermented  fruit  flavors,  especially  when  they
get particularly ripe.

Want a little more detail? Here goes, with a shout-out to Teri  Wadsworth  and  John
Paul of Cameron Winery in Dundee, Oregon. The levain is a symbiotic culture of lactic
acid bacteria and yeast. Lactic acid bacteria are a diverse group of bacteria that produce
lactic  acid,  carbon  dioxide,  a  small  amount  of  ethanol,  and  other  volatile  flavor
components as the end product of carbohydrate fermentation. Under the right conditions,
lactic  acid  bacteria  can  also  produce  acetic  acid.  In  a  levain,  the  lactic  acid  bacteria
feed  mostly  on  the  yeast’s  metabolic  by-products. As  with  natural  yeast  fermentation,
time is required for the bacteria to grow and produce acids and other flavor components.
Lactic  acid  bacteria  are  important  in  a  plethora  of  fermented  foods,  including  yogurt,
beer, pickles, sauerkraut, and cheese, and the acidity they produce inhibits the growth of
organisms that can cause spoilage.

I could go on about how alcohol can convert to acetic acid when there is an excess of
fermentation, but I don’t want to distract from the main goal, which is to know how to
manipulate the variables at play in the kitchen to make good levain bread. At the end of
this chapter is a table, Variations in Levain Cultures, summarizing the variables and their
impact on taste.

CULTURE GROWTH

As a new levain culture is being established over the course of several days, it evolves
in ways you can see, feel, and smell. At the beginning, right after you start it from scratch
by mixing just flour and water, it resembles either bread dough or a batter, depending on
how  much  water  is  used.  Within  48  hours,  after  two  daily  feedings,  the  culture  gets
gassy, it increases to as much as four times the starting volume, you can see bubbles, and
it has a weblike structure from its gluten. As the levain matures it develops a fragrant,
sometimes pungent and alcoholic, acidic nose. We use some whole wheat flour in the
levain at my bakery, and I call for doing the same in this book’s recipes. This results in a
funky, leathery ethanol smell in the mature culture. That smell takes my mind to some
undefined  place,  a  place  that  makes  me  pause  and  where  my  eyes  are  open  and  not
looking at anything at all.

A single hardworking yeast cell can divide, or bud, more than a dozen times. In the
right environment, this replication, and that of all of the offspring, produces billions of
yeast cells, each producing the gas that leavens and flavors the dough. Every time the
levain  is  fed  with  flour  and  water,  a  new  cycle  of  yeast  replication  and  fermentation
begins, and ultimately the entire dough mass is bubbling, lively with potential, and ready
to be used to make more bread.

SEPARATING MYTH FROM REALITY

Much is sometimes made of specific sourdough cultures from a particular place or even
preserved from a time past. For example, many people say you can only make a bread
that  tastes  like  San  Francisco  sourdough  in  San  Francisco.  Likewise,  some  people
believe  their levain  is  special  because  it’s  been  maintained  for  decades  or  it  was
derived  from  a  special  culture  that  someone  gave  them  or  that  they  ordered  by  mail.
While there are minor populations of yeast and bacteria that are indigenous to specific
geographic areas, the primary flora are the same in sourdoughs everywhere. It’s not a
where-it’s-from  game:  it’s  how  it’s  made,  and  with  what  ingredients,  that  makes  the
bread taste the way it does.

Adding Fruit to a Levain

Many  people  believe  their  levain  has  a  particular  character  due  to  how  it  was
established; for example, with a bunch of grapes added to a mash of flour and water. I
disagree.  Grape  yeasts  live  on  grapes  because  that’s  the  environment  that  suits  them.
Grape yeasts don’t flourish in a flour environment. Again, it isn’t how a levain is started
that determines its performance and flavor profile; what’s crucial is how it’s maintained.
Natural selection will rule in the flour environment. The addition of grapes, apples, or
other  such  ingredients  to  the  starter  provides  sugars  for  fermentation  and  short-term
aromatics.  Malt  would  do  the  same  thing:  provide  food  to  the  yeast.  Many  of  the
microorganisms  involved  in  starting  a  culture  can’t  tolerate  the  environment  as  the
culture  develops;  only  those  that  thrive  in  the  environment  that  is  developed  and
maintained will survive. As Raymond  Calvel  wrote  in Le Goût du Pain, “Recipes for
this purpose are often quite amusing, including cultures based on grape juice, potatoes,
raisins, yogurt, honey, and so on.… I simply use the proper type of bread flour.”

Having said that, I have nothing against tossing some quality fruit into a mature levain
culture for immediate use, and I know of one baker who uses honey in a special levain.
My  point  here  is  to  dispel  the  myth  that  a  levain  carries  the  elements  of  its  genesis

forward in its character. In fact, I’ve made some very interesting breads by adding fruit
to  the  levain. At  my  bakery,  we  once  made  apple  bread  with  a  levain  hydrated  with
apple cider. Best ever was when I grabbed a bucket of apple mash from Steve McCarthy
at Clear Creek Distillery and added it to some of the bakery’s levain, which then went
into a baba dough. That baba au pomme was one of the best things I’ve ever eaten.

BALANCE AND THE BAKER’S REWARD

In  my  naturally  leavened  breads,  I  aim  for  the  middle  of  the  lactic-acetic  spectrum  to
produce  bread  with  a  mellow  aroma  and  flavor  that  is  satisfying  by  itself  or  can
complement  a  variety  of  foods  and  wines.  This  kind  of  bread  flatters  whatever  it  is
served with. It tastes great, it’s crusty and flavorful, and it’s the kind of bread I don’t tire
of. I want to eat it every day.

The levain recipes in this book use 80 percent hydration for the levain culture. That
means the water in the culture amounts to 80 percent of the flour, by weight. Levains can
be more stiff, with hydration as low as 60 to 65 percent, in which case they will easily
form into a ball. They can also be wetter—as much as 100 percent hydration. Really, a
levain  can  be  at  any  hydration,  but  the  common  range  is  between  60  and  100  percent
hydration.

At my bakery, we use a levain with hydration close to that of the final dough it will be
used  in.  I  find  this  approach  more  balanced,  as  opposed  to  mixing  in  a  levain  with  a
substantially  different  hydration  than  the  dough.  The  result  is  bread  in  which  you  can
taste the wheat, the fermentation, and a subtle chorus of lingering background notes that
are all in harmony, without any element of taste outweighing any other.

LEVAIN INGREDIENTS

We use a blend of whole wheat and white flours in the levain at Ken’s Artisan Bakery,
and I call for doing the same in this book. This is intended to approximate the excellent
stone-ground flours produced by a small number of artisan mills in France. It all started
for me with the desire to reproduce a brownish country bread like my baker heroes in
Paris were baking, or a bread close to it, anyway, here in the United States.

Bakers  often  supplement  their  natural  levain  culture  by  adding  baker’s  yeast  to  the
final dough (not the levain culture). Many of the levain bread recipes in this book call for
adding store-bought yeast. This may seem contrary to the purist spirit of levain baking.
At first, I felt the same way. When I started my bakery, I set out to create an idealized

levain bread made only from a natural culture, without commercial yeast and using sel de
mer from the coast of Brittany.

The bread was good. I wish I could taste one of those loaves from the early years right
now.  But  with  time  I  found  I  wanted  loaves  with  a  slightly  lighter  crumb,  a  bit  more
volume, and a more delicate harmony of flavors. And adding commercial yeast was the
way  to  achieve  that.  It  results  in  greater  gas  production  (and  thus  more  volume),  and
mellows the dough’s acidity. An alternative way of adding yeast is to mix a poolish at
the  same  time  you  feed  the  levain  in  the  morning,  and  then  combine  both  types  of
leavening when mixing the final dough. In the summer of 2003, I started doing this at the
bakery—mixing a poolish five hours before mixing the levain doughs (Country  Brown
and Country  Blonde),  and  adding  the  poolish  to  the  final  dough  to  help  it  rise.  This
worked, but the truth is, it’s hard to tell the difference between breads produced using
that method and those that have a small amount of baker’s yeast added, and the latter is a
practice  that  has  been  common  in  France  for  over  one  hundred  years.  The  recipes  in
chapter 9, Hybrid Leavening Doughs, are leavened with levain supplemented with a bit
of  commercial  yeast,  whereas  those  in chapter 10,  Pure  Levain  Doughs,  are  leavened
solely with levain.

TAKING PURITY TO EXTREMES

For  a  couple  years  after  I  started  the  bakery,  we  used  coarse  sel  de  Guérande,
which I purchased in 20-kilo (44.1-pound) bags that had small puddles of seawater
in  the  bottom.  We  had  to  sift  through  that  salt  by  hand  every  morning  to  remove
occasional little bits of dirt or seaweed (hopefully nothing from the boots of the guy
who had raked the salt). Hey, I took the word artisan seriously! But I got tired of
cleaning  the  salt  every  morning,  thinking, Is this  really  necessary?  I  once  had  a
customer return a loaf of bread because he found a small chunk of dirt in it. But it’s
French, Coast-of-Brittany dirt! We now use clean, pure, beautiful coarse sea salt
from Sicily in our levain breads.

LEVAIN SCHEDULE

At Ken’s Artisan Bakery, we feed the levain three times a day. There are two reasons
why I didn’t go that route in this book. First, my bakery is a lot warmer than the typical
home kitchen, so the levain matures much more quickly and needs more feedings to keep

it from getting sour. Second, I have bakers present most of the hours of the day. I want to
offer you ways of making great levain breads without making you a slave to a schedule
that would deter most from repeating the effort. This is a book intended to be used over
and over.

Therefore, the schedule for feeding levain in this book requires just a single feeding in
the morning, about six to nine hours before mixing the final dough. You can maintain the
levain with a single feeding each morning, or you can use it to make dough and then store
a chunk of the unused levain in the refrigerator, to be refreshed the next time you want to
bake with it. All of those details are discussed in depth in chapter 8.

VARIABLES INFLUENCING LEVAIN CULTURES

Hydration
More liquid in the culture leads to greater production of lactic acid. Stiffer cultures
have a flavor profile more dominated by acetic acid.

Temperature
Warmer  temperatures,  meaning  78ºF  to  90ºF  (26ºC  to  32ºC),  favor  lactic  acid
production.  Cooler  temperatures,  meaning  55ºF  to  65ºF  (13ºC  to  18ºC),  favor
acetic acid production. Warmer cultures develop faster.

Flour
High-extraction flours (milled from a larger portion of the wheat berry than pure
white flour), whole grain wheat or rye flours, and high-ash flours (which have a
high mineral content) all contribute to more vigorous fermentation. They can also
create a volatile culture that requires more frequent feedings to prevent problems.
Every type of flour—white, whole wheat, rye, and so on—has its own personality,
as will different blends of flours.

Salt
Salt delays the fermentation process, and while some good bakers use salt in their
levain culture, I prefer not to, as I’m looking for active development. (Still, certain
environments or schedules necessitate the use of small amounts of salt.)

Yeast
Commercial  yeast  is  more  vigorous  than  wild  yeasts,  so  adding  even  a  small
amount of packaged yeast to start or boost a levain culture will ultimately result in

the  commercial  yeast  dominating  and  eventually  starving  out  the  wild  yeasts.
Bottom line: Don’t use packaged or commercial yeast in a levain culture, either to
start it or to maintain it. However, it is okay to use a small amount of baker’s yeast
in the final bread dough to supplement the fermentation from the levain culture—so
long as the unadulterated levain culture remains separate from the bread dough.

CHAPTER 8
LEVAIN METHOD

I

started  the  levain  we  use  at  my  bakery  in  1999,  in  a  class  I  attended  at  the San
Francisco  Baking  Institute,  and  I  have  kept  it  alive  ever  since.  In  that  class,  we
developed  levain  cultures  using  only  whole  rye  flour  and  water.  The  first  several
feedings  consisted  of  adding  equal  amounts  of  very  warm  water  (85°F  to  95°F,  or
29°C to 35°C) and whole rye flour to produce a mash of messy, very sticky dough, the
most remarkable quality of which was how difficult it was to wash off my hands after
mixing.  Twice  a  day  we  threw  away  most  of  the  levain,  added  more  flour  and  warm
water, mixed by hand, then covered the levain and returned it to the proofing cabinet.
Then we spent the next five minutes washing our hands. At first, nothing much seemed to
be happening, but by the fourth feeding we could smell a nice funk, and by the third day
the  culture  was  finally  expanding  and  announced  itself  with  a  strong-smelling,  funky,
alcoholic, and acidic perfume. Progress! You too can enjoy the pleasure that begins with
a leap of faith and ends with figuring out what to do with the culture once it’s active.

There are two stages to concern yourself with. First, it takes several days to establish
a  good,  active  levain  culture.  Second,  you  need  to  have  a  maintenance  program  for
feeding your levain and keeping it active and ready for baking. At a bakery where bread
is  made  every  day,  it’s  simple  to  follow  the  same  schedule  every  day.  For  the  home
baker who wants to bake from a levain once a week, you need a different sort of routine
to store your active levain (in the refrigerator works) and to restore it on a schedule that
makes it available when you’re ready to use it.

The best way to start a levain is to use whole grain flour: whole rye, whole wheat, or
a combination of the two. Rye flour doughs are sticky and way more difficult to rinse off
your hands than wheat flour doughs, so you’ll find it easier to start a levain with whole
wheat flour than with whole rye flour. But if whole rye is what you have or what you
want to use, that’s fine. Whole grain flour is preferable because there’s more yeast and
mineral  content  in  the  bran  and  outer  layers  of  the  wheat  or  rye  berry  than  in  the
endosperm.

STEP-BY-STEP GUIDE TO STARTING YOUR LEVAIN

If you’re interested in keeping a levain around at all times, then in addition to the 6-quart
clear, round tub you use for your poolish and biga, you’ll want to have a second one
(with a lid) to use as your permanent levain bucket. This tub will be plenty big enough to
hold the culture as it begins to develop gas and expand. Reuse the same container  for
each  successive  mix  without  cleaning  it.  The  flora  building  up  inside  the  container  is
safe  and  will  be  valuable  in  making  the  culture  active.  Before  you  begin,  weigh  the
empty tub and write the weight down. You’ll need this information on Day 4 (and for the
rest of the levain’s life), when you use 100 grams of the levain as the basis for regular
feeding.  Knowing  the  weight  of  the  tub  will  allow  you  to  simply  remove  the  excess
levain and leave the portion to be fed in the tub.

For  the  first  several  days  of  building  up  your  culture,  exact  measurements  aren’t
necessary,  so  if  I  say  to  use  500  grams  of flour  and  500  grams  of  water,  it’s  okay  if
amounts of either are slightly more or less. If, for example, you accidentally pour in 550
grams  of  water,  there’s  no  need  to  compensate  by  adding  more  flour.  However,  once
your  culture  is  established  and  you  switch  to  a  maintenance  routine,  using  the  exact
amounts of flour and water and the right water temperatures is necessary if you want to
achieve  consistent  results.  Establishing  your  levain  will  take  five  days,  as  outlined
below.

Day 1

ANY TIME BEFORE NOON: Put 500 grams (3¾ cups + 2 tablespoons) of whole wheat flour with
500 grams (2¼ cups) of water at about 90°F (32°C) in a 6-quart round tub and mix by
hand just until incorporated. Leave the slurry-like mixture uncovered for 1 to 2 hours,
then cover it and let it rest in a warm place. A temperature of 75°F to 90°F (24°C to
32°C) would be ideal, but if you don’t have a spot that warm in your house, don’t sweat
it.

Starting Your Levain. First row: Day 1, just after mixing; 24 hours later; tossing all but an eyeballed
quarter on Day 2. Second row: Day 3, morning (48 hours since beginning); Day 3, morning, top view;

texture of levain on Day 3. Third row: Day 4, morning (more bubbles!); Day 4, morning, side view; texture

of levain on Day 4, morning.

Day 2

ANY  TIME  BEFORE  NOON:  Throw  away  about  three-quarters  of  your  initial  mix  (it’s  fine  to
estimate  the  volume).  Leave  the  remainder  in  the  tub. Add  500  grams  (3¾  cups  +  2
tablespoons) of whole wheat flour and 500 grams (2¼ cups) of 90°F (32°C) water to the
goop in the tub and mix by hand just until incorporated. Leave the mixture uncovered for

1 to 2 hours, then cover and let rest in a warm place.

By the end of Day 2 the levain should have expanded to almost the 2-quart line of a 6-

quart dough tub, with some small bubbles visible.

Day 3

ANY TIME BEFORE NOON: Progress! The levain should be 2 times the volume it was when you
mixed it the previous day, with bubbles throughout and a leathery alcohol smell. Again,
throw away about three-quarters of the mixture, leaving the remainder in the tub. Add
500 grams (3¾ cups + 2 tablespoons) of whole wheat flour and 500 grams (2¼ cups) of
90°F (32°C) water and mix by hand just until incorporated. Leave the mixture uncovered
for 1 to 2 hours, then cover it and let it rest in a warm place. Later in the day the levain
should have a distinctly pungent, “sour porridge” odor. Give it a whiff.

Day 4

ANY  TIME  BEFORE  NOON: The levain should again be back up to the 2-quart line of your 6-
quart dough tub, with bubbles throughout. On Day 4, you’ll reserve a smaller amount of
levain—throw  away  all  but  200  grams  (¾  cup)  of  the  mixture. You  will  want  to  be
accurate with this measurement, so use your scale and scoop out levain until the overall
weight reading is 200 grams greater than the starting weight of the tub. Add 500 grams
(3¾  cups  +  2  tablespoons)  of  whole  wheat  flour  and  500  grams  (2¼  cups)  of  90°F
(32°C)  water  and  mix  by  hand  just  until  incorporated.  Cover  and  let  rest  in  a  warm
place.

WEIGH YOUR EMPTY LEVAIN TUB!

Measure  the  empty  weight  of  the container that will hold your levain culture and
record that information somewhere. You can even write it on a piece of painter’s
tape and affix it to the outside of the container. This way, when it’s time to feed or
refresh the levain, you can easily determine the weight of the levain by putting the
tub on your scale and subtracting the weight of the tub. My levain bucket weighs
410 grams, so I have 100 grams of levain in my bucket when I put it on a zeroed
scale and the total weight is 510 grams.

Left to right: Mature levain, in the morning before feeding; preparing to remove all but 100 grams of

mature levain; 100 grams of levain in the tub, ready for its next feeding; mature levain after the morning

feed.

Day 5

The levain culture should now be vigorous enough to use in any of the levain bread and
pizza dough recipes in this book. The best cue that a levain is mature is when, 7 to 8
hours after the morning mix, it has a medium-ripe pungency and, if you wet your hand and
pull  out  a  chunk  of  it,  you  should  feel  its  gassiness  and  be  able  to  sense  its  weblike
internal structure. It will be very goopy, with somewhat viscous texture. In any case, on
Day 5 you’ll switch from building your levain to a regular feeding schedule, using 80
percent hydration, a blend of white and whole wheat flour, and slightly cooler water.

SOMETIME BETWEEN 7 AND 9 A.M.: Throw away all but 150 grams (½ cup + 1 tablespoon) of
the mixture. Use your scale and scoop out levain until the weight is 150 grams greater
than the starting weight of the empty tub. Add 400 grams (3 cups + 2 tablespoons) of
white flour, 100 grams (¾ cup + ½ tablespoon) of whole wheat flour, and 400 grams
(1¾  cups)  of  85°F  (29°C)  water  to  the  tub  and  mix  by  hand  just  until  incorporated.
Cover and let rest in a warm place.

By the afternoon, the levain should be ready for use in dough, so you’ll want to go
ahead and read the next section, “Using Your Levain,” which explains how to maintain
the levain culture, what to look for in a mature levain, and how to store and refresh the
culture if you won’t be using it daily.

USING YOUR LEVAIN

Every time I feed the levain in the morning, I enjoy the gassiness of the culture, which
has  expanded  to  three  to  four  times  its  volume  if  I  haven’t  used  any  of  it  since  the

previous  morning’s  feeding.  When  the  lid  comes  off,  there’s  a  hot  rush  of  alcoholic
perfume. Let that pass, then stick your nose in the levain bucket and take in a big whiff.
Get familiar with the fragrance of the levain at this stage and at the point when you’re
measuring it out for use later in the day. These points of reference—volume and smell—
are cues that will be your guide to the final result. With time, experience, and exposure
to the process, you’ll come to trust your judgment.

With each recipe in chapters 9 through 11, if you follow my instructions on timing and
water temperatures and use the precise measurements in this book, you can proceed with
confidence. The biggest variable is going to be the ambient temperature. If your kitchen
is significantly warmer or colder than mine, which typically hovers around 70°F (21°C)
and  gets  down  to  about  65°F  (18°C)  at  night,  you  may  need  to  make  adjustments.  I
suggest getting familiar with the way your levain smells when you take it out of its bucket
to use in dough. That smell will directly translate to the flavor of the bread. See how you
like the way the bread tastes. If it’s too tart or sour, you can adjust next time by using
slightly cooler water when feeding the levain in the morning or by mixing the final dough
a little earlier in the afternoon, when the levain isn’t as ripe. Likewise, if your kitchen is
humid and a lot warmer than mine, say 80°F (27°C), then you may want to mix your final
dough an hour or two earlier than the recipes prescribe. On the other hand, if you have a
hot kitchen, you could follow the schedule I outline and discover that you like the taste of
the  bread  from  an  extra-ripe  levain,  which  is  a  little  more  pungent  and  sour.  If  your
kitchen is a lot colder than mine, put on a sweater! And compensate by using water at
about 95°F (35°C) when feeding the levain in the morning. When feeding the levain, the
target temperature is 78°F to 80°F (26°C to 27°C) right after mixing.

This book has levain bread recipes that operate on different schedules. The recipes in
chapter 9, Hybrid Leavening Doughsis bread that’s a bit darker and slightly, all follow
the same schedule. You feed the levain in the morning, mix the final bread dough in the
afternoon, divide and shape into loaves five hours later, and let the loaves rise slowly
overnight in the refrigerator before baking them the next morning. The recipes in chapter
9 also use a small amount of baker’s yeast (added to the dough, not the levain) to give the
bread a lighter crumb and a little extra lift, but their flavor and character are primarily
influenced by the levain. The recipes in chapter 10, on the other hand, are pure levain
doughs,  without  added  baker’s  yeast,  and  follow  a  different  schedule.  You  feed  the
levain in the morning, mix the final dough early in the evening, let the dough undergo
overnight  bulk  fermentation,  divide  and  shape  into  loaves  the  next  morning,  and  bake
four hours later. Both methods use the same schedule for feeding, storing, and refreshing
the levain. So you can let your schedule and taste preferences dictate which approach
you use.

All of these breads are well worth the effort, and once you become accustomed to the

process, it truly isn’t much effort. Time does most of the work.

The breads that result from these two methods—with added baker’s yeast and without
—are not identical. Hybrid leavening breads have a lighter texture, more volume, and a
thinner crust, whereas pure levain breads are pleasingly rustic, being a little less domed
and slightly smaller and denser and having bigger holes and more chew to the crust (in a
good way). If pure levain breads are baked completely to dark umber in spots, the crust
flavors will permeate into the crumb of the bread assertively. Pure levain breads also
have  more  zip  on  the  palate—a  bit  of  a  tang,  but  hopefully  not  too  much—whereas
breads with hybrid leavening have a more delicate balance of flavors. I encourage you to
try  both  kinds  of  recipes  so  you  can  learn  about  the  pleasures  of  each  style  of  levain
baking and discover your own preferences.

SEASONAL VARIATIONS

I  developed  all  of  the  recipes  for  this  book  in  my  home  kitchen  and  tested  them
during  each  season.  Here  in  Portland,  winters  are  fairly  cold,  although  not  as
below-freezing cold as, say, Minnesota or Manitoba. I’ve found that although my
kitchen temperatures are roughly the same year-round, it’s still colder in there in
winter. As a result my levain culture isn’t as active in winter and my levain doughs
develop  a  bit  more  slowly  than  in  the  summer. Your  own  experience  will  vary
depending on the climate you live in. In winter, I compensate by putting more levain
in  the  final  dough  than  I  do  in  summer—somewhere  around  50  grams  (3
tablespoons)  more.  I’ve  put  notes  regarding  this  option  in  the  pure  levain  dough
recipes in this book because those are the doughs most affected.

Another wintertime adjustment if the levain is developing slowly is to increase the
amount  of  levain  retained  in  the  morning  feed  by  about  30  to  50  grams  (2  to  3
tablespoons), keeping the fresh flour and water amounts the same. In summertime, if
the  bread  is  too  sour,  I  sometimes  reduce  the  amount  of  levain  retained  in  the
morning feeding. Commercial yeast is much more vigorous than the wild culture in
a levain, so hybrid leavening doughs with added baker’s yeast (as in chapter 9) will
have less seasonal variation than pure levain doughs.

FEEDING YOUR LEVAIN

The levain recipes in this book assume you have a mature levain culture. If you’re going
to bake with your levain several days each week, you’ll want to have a daily routine for
feeding the levain. You can do it each morning, ideally at about the same time, but it can
vary by an hour or two in either direction without causing problems. When it’s time to
feed the levain, use the following formula:

• 100 grams (⅓ cup + 1½ tablespoons) of levain (or a little more in winter; see

“Seasonal Variations”)

• 100 grams (¾ cup + ½ tablespoon) of whole wheat flour
• 400 grams (3 cups + 2 tablespoons) of white flour
• 400 grams (1¾ cups) of water, 85°F to 90°F (29°C to 32°C), depending on the

season (warmer in winter, cooler in summer)

The  target  temperature  for  the  levain  right  after  mixing  is  between  78°F  and  80°F
(26°C  and  27°C).  If  you  aren’t  sure  what  temperature  of  water  to  use,  measure  the
temperature  of  the  levain  after  you’ve  mixed  it  and  adjust  accordingly  next  time.
Between feedings, cover the levain and let it rest at room temperature.

You can pare down the amount of levain, fresh flour, and fresh water used with each
feeding as long as you maintain the same ratios. Here’s the formula for maintaining half
the amount of levain:

• 50 grams (3 tablespoons) of levain
• 50 grams (⅓ cup + 1 tablespoon) of whole wheat flour
• 200 grams (1½ cups + 1 tablespoon) of white flour
• 200 grams (⅞ cup) of water, 85°F to 90°F (29°C to 32°C), depending on the season

When you remove all but 50 grams (3 tablespoons) of levain from your levain tub, it
will look like there’s not much left other than an amount you would wash out. It’s not
much, but it holds a lot of potential!

When  you  have  thrown  away  all  but  100  grams  (⅓  cup  +  1½  tablespoons)  of  the
levain (think of it as spent fuel), zero the scale. Add the amount of fresh flour needed,
then add the amount of water needed, at the specified temperature, and mix by hand just
until incorporated. One note on hand mixing levain: These cultures are quite acidic. If
you  mix  levain  frequently  and  have  sensitive  skin,  you  might  want  to  use  vinyl
disposable gloves. They’re handy to keep around anyway. I keep a box in my kitchen for
various uses, like hand tossing salads.

After using your levain in a recipe, keep the remainder in its tub at room temperature.
The next morning—when you regularly feed your levain—refresh the remainder as usual.

STORING AND RESTORING YOUR LEVAIN

If you will not be making dough with your levain culture every day or don’t feel like
feeding it every day, you need to have a plan for storing your levain on those off days
and restoring it as needed. It’s best to store it in the refrigerator. After using it in a final
dough mix, take about 300 grams (1 cup + 3 tablespoons) of the remaining levain, coat it
with a film of water, and put it in a nonperforated plastic bag, then refrigerate for up to 1
month.

When you’re ready to use it again, you’ll need to plan ahead in order to bring it back

and use it at full strength. Here’s the procedure I recommend:

STEP 1: TWO DAYS BEFORE YOU PLAN TO BAKE:  Remove the levain from the refrigerator and put 200
grams (¾ cup) of it into your empty levain bucket. Discard the remainder. If possible, let
the levain sit out at room temperature for 30 to 60 minutes to warm up. Then add 100
grams  (¾  cup  +  ½  tablespoon)  of  whole  wheat  flour,  400  grams  (3  cups  +  2
tablespoons) of white flour, and 400 grams (1¾ cups) of 95°F (35°C) water and mix by
hand until just incorporated. Cover and let rest in a warm spot overnight.

STEP 2: THE MORNING OF THE DAY BEFORE YOU PLAN TO BAKE:  Feed the levain again, using the same
feeding you use for daily levain: Discard all but 100 grams (⅓ cup + 1½ tablespoons) of
the levain. Add 100 grams (¾ cup + ½ tablespoon) of whole wheat flour, 400 grams (3
cups + 2 tablespoons) of white flour, and 400 grams (1¾ cups) of water at 85°F to 90°F
(29°C to 32°C), depending on the season. Mix by hand until just incorporated.

You have now completed the first step of each of the levain recipes. Cover the levain

and let it rest in a warm spot until you mix your dough later that day. After overnight bulk
fermentation or proof, depending on the recipe, you will be ready to bake the next day.

SAMPLE SCHEDULE

If you’re starting a new levain and want to have it ready for baking bread on, say, a
Sunday  morning,  then  start  with  Day  1  of  the  section  “Step-by-Step  Guide  to
Starting Your Levain” the Tuesday before. Although starting a new levain takes five
days, each day the process takes just a few minutes.

If you have a levain stored in the refrigerator, here’s a schedule for refreshing and
feeding it so it will be ready for baking on Sunday morning:

1. On Friday morning, refresh your refrigerated levain following step 1 of the

procedure in the section “Storing and Refreshing Your Levain,” above.

2. On Saturday morning, toss all but 100 grams (⅓ cup + 1½ tablespoons) of the

levain and follow step 2 of the procedure for refreshing.

3. On Saturday afternoon, mix the dough following the recipe of your choice.
4. For hybrid leavening recipes (chapter 9), on Saturday evening divide and

shape the loaves and refrigerate overnight for slow proofing. For pure levain
recipes (chapters 10 and 11), bulk fermentation extends overnight, and the
loaves are divided and shaped the next morning.

5. For hybrid leavening breads, bake on Sunday morning; for pure levain breads,

bake at around noon.

Walnut Levain Bread.

CHAPTER 9
HYBRID LEAVENING DOUGHS

PAIN DE CAMPAGNE

75% WHOLE WHEAT LEVAIN BREAD

BRAN-ENCRUSTED LEVAIN BREAD

WALNUT LEVAIN BREAD

FIELD BLEND #1

FIELD BLEND #2

Pain de Campagne

PAIN DE CAMPAGNE

Pain de campagne is a rustic country bread that has a golden color to its crumb, subtle
round flavors from fermentation, and a chewy and delicious crust. It improves with age
for a couple of days after baking and can last nearly a week. This version has just a bit of
whole wheat flour in both the final dough ingredients and the levain culture. The whole
wheat flour boosts the energy of the fermentation and gives the final bread greater depth
of flavor and just a touch of acidity on the palate. The long overnight proofing of the
loaves in the refrigerator allows a nice complexity of flavors to build. Once you have a
mature levain culture, this bread isn’t much work and really delivers on taste and texture
—and good looks.

Many  French  bakers  use  a  small  amount  of  rye  flour  in  bread  they  call pain  de
campagne to give the crumb a slight grayish tint and a hint of rye flavor, whereas I use
whole wheat here. Feel free to play with the flour blend. Another mixture that I really
like  in  this  recipe  is  70  percent  white  flour,  20  percent  whole  wheat  flour,  and  10
percent whole rye flour. For guidance on playing around with flour  blends, “Making a
Bread (or Pizza) Dough You Can Call Your Own.”  Just make sure that the total amount
of flour in your final dough mix is the same as in this recipe—800 grams (200 grams of
flour are in the levain).

One  of  my  common  uses  for  this  bread  is  tearing  a  couple  of  slices  into  croutons,
lightly toasting them until slightly crisp, then tossing them in a mustardy vinaigrette, so
the vinaigrette really soaks into the croutons, and then with fresh lettuces and a chopped
hard-boiled  egg.  This  bread  is  ideal  for  onion  soup gratiné  or ribollita.  It’s  also
excellent  spread  with  pâté  or  for  sopping  up  sauce,  not  to  mention  for  sandwiches  or
morning toast with butter and jam. I sometimes use this bread, very lightly toasted, as an
alternative to burger buns.

THIS RECIPE MAKES 2 LOAVES, EACH ABOUT 1½ POUNDS.
BULK FERMENTATION: About 5 hours
PROOF TIME: 12 to 14 hours
SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Feed the levain at 8 a.m., mix the final dough at 3 p.m., shape

into loaves at 8 p.m., proof the loaves in the refrigerator overnight, and
bake around 8 to 10 a.m. the next morning.

Levain
INGREDIENT
Mature, active levain
White flour
Whole wheat flour
Water

QUANTITY
100 g
400 g
100 g
400 g, 85ºF to 90ºF (29ºC to 32ºC)

 
⅓ cup + 1½ tbsp
3 cups + 2 tbsp
¾ cup + ½ tbsp
1¾ cups

Final Dough

INGREDIENT

White flour
Whole wheat
flour

Water

FINAL DOUGH MIX
QUANTITY
740 g

60 g

620 g, 90ºF to 95ºF (32ºC
to 35ºC)

Fine sea salt

21 g

Instant dried
yeast
Levain

2 g

360 g

 
5¾ cups
½ cup + ½
tbsp

2¾ cups

1 tbsp + 1
scant tsp

½ tsp

1⅓ cups

Baker’s Formula
QUANTITY IN
LEVAIN
160 g

TOTAL RECIPE
QUANTITY
900 g

BAKER’S
PERCENTAGE
90%

40 g

160 g

0

0

 

100 g

780 g

21 g

2 g

 

10%

78%

2.1%

0.2%

20%*

* The baker’s percentage for levain is the amount of flour in the levain expressed as a

percentage of the total flour in the recipe.

1a. Feed the levain About 24 hours after your previous feeding of the levain, discard
all  but  100  grams  of  the  levain,  leaving  the  remainder  in  your  6-quart  tub. Add  400
grams of white flour, 100 grams of whole wheat flour, and 400 grams of water at 85°F to
90°F (29°C to 32°C) and mix by hand just until incorporated. Cover and let rest at room
temperature for 6 to 8 hours before mixing the final dough.

1b. Autolyse After 6 to 8 hours, mix the 740 grams of white flour and the 60 grams of
whole wheat flour by hand in a 12-quart round tub. Add the 620 grams of 90°F to 95°F
(32°C to 35°C) water and mix by hand just until incorporated. Cover and let rest for 20
to 30 minutes.

2. Mix the final dough Sprinkle the 21 grams of salt and the 2 grams (½ teaspoon) of
yeast evenly over the top of the dough.

Put a container with about a finger’s depth of warm water on your scale so you can
easily remove the levain after it’s weighed. With wet hands, transfer 360 grams of levain
into the container.

Transfer the weighed levain to the 12-quart dough tub, minimizing the amount of water

transferred with it. Mix by hand, wetting your working hand before mixing so the dough
doesn’t  stick  to  you. Use the pincer method alternating with folding the dough to fully
integrate the ingredients. The target dough temperature at the end of the mix is 77°F to
78°F (25°C to 26°C).

3. Fold This dough needs three or four folds (see here). It’s easiest to apply the folds
during the first 1½ to 2 hours after mixing the dough.

When the dough is about 2½ times its original volume, about 5 hours after mixing, it’s

ready to be divided.

4. Divide  With  floured  hands,  gently  ease  the  dough  out  of  the  tub  and  onto  a  lightly
floured work surface. With your hands still floured, pick up the dough and ease it back
down onto the work surface in a somewhat even shape. Use a bit of flour to dust the area
in the middle where you’ll cut the dough, then cut it into 2 equal-size pieces with a dough
knife or plastic dough scraper.

5. Shape Dust 2 proofing baskets with flour. Shape each piece of dough into a medium-
tight ball following these instructions. Place each seam side down in its proofing basket.

6. Proof Place each basket in a nonperforated plastic bag and refrigerate overnight.

The  next  morning,  12  to  14  hours  after  the  loaves  went  into  the  refrigerator,  they
should be ready to bake, straight from the refrigerator. They don’t need to come to room
temperature first.

7. Preheat At least 45 minutes prior to baking, put a rack in the middle of the oven and
put 2 Dutch ovens on the rack with their lids on. Preheat the oven to 475°F (245°C).

If you only have 1 Dutch oven, keep the other loaf in the refrigerator while the first
loaf is baking, and bake the loaves sequentially, giving the Dutch oven a 5-minute reheat
after removing the first loaf.

8. Bake For the next step, please be careful not to let your hands, fingers, or forearms
touch the extremely hot Dutch oven.

Invert the proofed loaf onto a lightly floured countertop, keeping in mind that the top of

the loaf will be the side that was facing down while it was rising—the seam side.

Remove  the  preheated  Dutch  oven  from  your  kitchen  oven,  remove  the  lid,  and
carefully place the loaf in the Dutch oven seam side up. Cover and bake for 30 minutes,
then uncover and bake for about 20 minutes, until dark brown all around the loaf. Check
after 15 minutes of baking uncovered in case your oven runs hot.

Remove the Dutch oven and carefully tilt it to turn the loaf out. Let cool on a rack or
set  the  loaf  on  its  side  so  air  can  circulate  around  it.  Let  the  loaf  rest  for  at  least  20

minutes before slicing.

WHAT IF THE DOUGH ISN’T AT THE TARGET TEMPERATURE?

If the final mix temperature is cooler than 77ºF (25ºC), don’t worry—it may just
take longer to increase to 2½ times its original volume. Put the dough in a warm
spot, and use warmer water next time you make the recipe. If the dough temperature
is  above  78ºF  (26ºC),  the  dough  will  probably  expand  faster,  depending  on  the
temperature of your kitchen. Use cooler water next time you make the recipe.

75% WHOLE WHEAT LEVAIN BREAD

This delicious high-fiber levain bread improves in flavor for a couple of days after it is
baked. I get flavors of nut butter and Wheatena in this bread and love it with good dairy
butter  or  simply  toasted.  It’s  also  wonderful  with  a  nice  soft  Robiola  cheese,  apricot
jam, or potted duck liver.

You  may  notice  that  this  bread  has  slightly  less  yeast  than  the  other  breads  in  this
chapter that are made on the same schedule. This is because whole wheat flour has more
nutrients  for  yeast  and  therefore  ferments  faster  than  white  flour.  The  bran  in  whole
wheat flour cuts through the gluten strands in the dough, resulting in a somewhat smaller,
denser loaf. Who cares? It’s not a brick. The texture and volume of this loaf are very
impressive for the amount of whole grain it carries. I love this bread.

THIS RECIPE MAKES 2 LOAVES, EACH ABOUT 1½ POUNDS.
BULK FERMENTATION: About 5 hours
PROOF TIME: 12 to 13 hours
SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Feed the levain at 8 a.m., mix the final dough at 3 p.m., shape

into loaves at 8 p.m., proof the loaves in the refrigerator overnight, and
bake between 8 and 9 a.m. the next morning.

Levain
INGREDIENT
Mature, active levain
White flour
Whole wheat flour
Water

QUANTITY
100 g
400 g
100 g
400 g, 85ºF to 90ºF (29ºC to 32ºC)

⅓ cup + 1½ tbsp
3 cups + 2 tbsp
¾ cup + ½ tbsp
1¾ cups

Final Dough

INGREDIENT

White flour
Whole wheat
flour

Water

FINAL DOUGH MIX
QUANTITY
90 g

710 g

660 g, 90ºF to 95ºF (32ºC
to 35ºC)

Fine sea salt

21 g

Baker’s Formula
QUANTITY IN
LEVAIN

 
½ cup + 3 tbsp 160 g
5½ cups + ½
tbsp

40 g

2⅞ cups

160 g

1 tbsp + 1

0

TOTAL RECIPE
QUANTITY
250 g

BAKER’S
PERCENTAGE
25%

750 g

820 g

21 g

75%

82%

2.1%

Instant dried
yeast
Levain

1.75 g

360 g

scant tsp

Scant ½ tsp

1⅓ cups

0

 

1.75 g

 

0.175%

20%*

* The baker’s percentage for levain is the amount of flour in the levain expressed as a

percentage of the total flour in the recipe.

1a. Feed the levain About 24 hours after your previous feeding of the levain, discard
all but 100 grams of levain, leaving the remainder in your 6-quart tub. Add 400 grams of
white flour, 100 grams of whole wheat flour, and 400 grams of water at 85°F to 90°F
(29°C  to  32°C)  and  mix  by  hand  just  until  incorporated.  Cover  and  let  rest  at  room
temperature for 6 to 8 hours before mixing the final dough.

1b. Autolyse After 6 to 8 hours, mix the 90 grams of white flour and the 710 grams of
whole wheat flour by hand in a 12-quart round tub. Add the 660 grams of 90°F to 95°F
(32°C to 35°C) water and mix by hand just until incorporated. Cover and let rest for 20
to 30 minutes.

2.  Mix  the  final  dough  Sprinkle  the  21  grams  of  salt  and  the  1.75  grams  (scant  ½
teaspoon) of yeast evenly over the top of the dough.

Put a container with about a finger’s depth of warm water on your scale so you can
easily remove the levain after it’s weighed. With wet hands, transfer 360 grams of levain
into the container.

Transfer the weighed levain to the 12-quart dough tub, minimizing the amount of water
transferred with it. Mix by hand, wetting your working hand before mixing so the dough
doesn’t  stick  to  you. Use the pincer method alternating with folding the dough to fully
integrate the ingredients. The target dough temperature at the end of the mix is 77°F to
78°F (25°C to 26°C).

3. Fold This dough needs two or three folds (see here). It’s easiest to apply the folds
during the first 1½ to 2 hours after mixing the dough.

When the dough is about 2½ times its original volume, about 5 hours after mixing, it’s

ready to be divided.

4. Divide  With  floured  hands,  gently  ease  the  dough  out  of  the  tub  and  onto  a  lightly
floured work surface. With your hands still floured, pick up the dough and ease it back
down onto the work surface in a somewhat even shape. Use a bit of flour to dust the area
in the middle where you’ll cut the dough, then cut it into 2 equal-size pieces with a dough
knife or plastic dough scraper.

5. Shape Dust 2 proofing baskets with flour. Shape each piece of dough into a medium-
tight ball following these instructions. Place each seam side down in its proofing basket.

6. Proof Place each basket in a nonperforated plastic bag and refrigerate overnight.

The  next  morning,  12  to  13  hours  after  the  loaves  went  into  the  refrigerator,  they
should be ready to bake, straight from the refrigerator. They don’t need to come to room
temperature first.

7. Preheat At least 45 minutes prior to baking, put a rack in the middle of the oven and
put 2 Dutch ovens on the rack with their lids on. Preheat the oven to 475°F (245°C).

If you only have 1 Dutch oven, keep the other loaf in the refrigerator while the first
loaf is baking, and bake the loaves sequentially, giving the Dutch oven a 5-minute reheat
after removing the first loaf.

8. Bake For the next step, please be careful not to let your hands, fingers, or forearms
touch the extremely hot Dutch oven.

Invert the proofed loaf onto a lightly floured countertop, keeping in mind that the top of

the loaf will be the side that was facing down while it was rising—the seam side.

Remove  the  preheated  Dutch  oven  from  your  kitchen  oven,  remove  the  lid,  and
carefully place the loaf in the Dutch oven seam side up. Cover and bake for 30 minutes,
then  uncover  and  bake  for  about  20  minutes,  until  medium  dark  brown  all  around  the
loaf. Check after 15 minutes of baking uncovered in case your oven runs hot.

Remove the Dutch oven and carefully tilt it to turn the loaf out. Let cool on a rack or
set  the  loaf  on  its  side  so  air  can  circulate  around  it.  Let  the  loaf  rest  for  at  least  20
minutes before slicing.

Bran-Ecrusted Levain Bread

BRAN-ENCRUSTED LEVAIN BREAD

Wheat germ and bran are expelled from the wheat kernel in the modern milling process,
leaving just the endosperm, which is milled to make white flour. Bran takes up about 14
percent of the kernel’s weight, and germ accounts for 2.5 to 3 percent of the weight. This
recipe folds the germ back in and coats the loaf with a small amount of bran. If you want
to use more germ in the dough, go for it; up to about 100 grams should be fine. Although I
have seen some recipes go higher, I think too much germ in the dough weighs down the
crumb. The bran coating, which can tolerate a long baking time, gives the crust a nice
crisp crunch and a roasted nut flavor. The bran does have a habit of scattering when you
slice the bread—c’est la vie. A handful of bran goes into the proofing baskets and will
adhere to the loaves when you remove them for baking.

THIS RECIPE MAKES 2 LOAVES, EACH ABOUT 1½ POUNDS.
BULK FERMENTATION: About 5 hours
PROOF TIME: 12 to 14 hours
SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Feed the levain at 8 a.m., mix the final dough at 3 p.m., shape

into loaves at 8 p.m., proof the loaves in the refrigerator overnight, and
bake around 8 to 10 a.m. the next morning.

Levain
INGREDIENT
Mature, active levain
White flour
Whole wheat flour
Water

QUANTITY
100 g
400 g
100 g
400 g, 85ºF to 90ºF (29ºC to 32ºC)

 
⅓ cup + 1½ tbsp
3 cups + 2 tbsp
¾ cup + ½ tbsp
1¾ cups

Final Dough

INGREDIENT

White flour
Whole wheat
flour

Water

FINAL DOUGH MIX
QUANTITY
800 g

0

620 g, 90ºF to 95ºF (32ºC
to 35ºC)

 
6¼ cups

0

2¾ cups

1 tbsp + 1

Baker’s Formula
QUANTITY IN
LEVAIN
160 g

TOTAL RECIPE
QUANTITY
960 g

BAKER’S
PERCENTAGE
96%

40 g

160 g

40 g

780 g

4%

78%

21 g

Fine sea salt
Instant dried
yeast
Wheat germ 30 g

2 g

Wheat bran

0

Levain

360 g

scant tsp

½ tsp

0

0

⅓ cup + 1 tbsp 0

0

1⅓ cups

0

20%*

21 g

2 g

30 g
20 g (⅓ cup + 1
tbsp)
 

2.1%

0.2%

3%

2%

 

* The baker’s percentage for levain is the amount of flour in the levain expressed as a

percentage of the total flour in the recipe.

1a. Feed the levain About 24 hours after your previous feeding of the levain, discard
all but 100 grams of levain, leaving the remainder in your 6-quart tub. Add 400 grams of
white flour, 100 grams of whole wheat flour, and 400 grams of water at 85°F to 90°F
(29°C to 32°C) and mix by hand just until incorporated. Cover and let rest for 6 to 8
hours before mixing the final dough.

1b. Autolyse After 6 to 8 hours, mix the 800 grams of white flour and the 30 grams of
wheat germ by hand in a 12-quart round tub. Add the 620 grams of 90°F to 95°F (32°C
to 35°C) water and mix by hand just until incorporated. Cover and let rest for 20 to 30
minutes.

2. Mix the final dough Sprinkle the 21 grams of salt and the 2 grams (½ teaspoon) of
yeast evenly over the top of the dough.

Put a container with about a finger’s depth of warm water on your scale so you can
easily remove the levain after it’s weighed. With wet hands, transfer 360 grams of levain
into the container.

Transfer the weighed levain to the 12-quart dough tub, minimizing the amount of water
transferred with it. Mix by hand, wetting your working hand before mixing so the dough
doesn’t  stick  to  you. Use the pincer method alternating with folding the dough to fully
integrate the ingredients. The target dough temperature at the end of the mix is 77°F to
78°F (25°C to 26°C).

3. Fold This dough needs three or four folds (see here). It’s easiest to apply the folds
during the first 1½ to 2 hours after mixing the dough.

When the dough is about 2½ times its original volume, about 5 hours after mixing, it’s

ready to be divided.

4. Divide Lightly dust 2 proofing baskets with flour, then sprinkle 10 grams of wheat
bran evenly in each basket.

With  floured  hands,  gently  ease  the  dough  out  of  the  tub  and  onto  a  lightly  floured
work surface. With your hands still floured, pick up the dough and ease it back down
onto the work surface in a somewhat even shape. Use a bit of flour to dust the area in the
middle where you’ll cut the dough, then cut it into 2 equal-size pieces with a dough knife
or plastic dough scraper.

5.  Shape  Shape  each  piece  of  dough  into  a  medium-tight  ball  following these
instructions. Place each seam side down in its proofing basket.

6. Proof Place each basket in a nonperforated plastic bag and refrigerate overnight.

The  next  morning,  12  to  14  hours  after  the  loaves  went  into  the  refrigerator,  they
should be ready to bake, straight from the refrigerator. They don’t need to come to room
temperature first.

7. Preheat At least 45 minutes prior to baking, put a rack in the middle of the oven and
put 2 Dutch ovens on the rack with their lids on. Preheat the oven to 475°F (245°C).

If you only have 1 Dutch oven, keep the other loaf in the refrigerator while the first
loaf is baking, and bake the loaves sequentially, giving the Dutch oven a 5-minute reheat
after removing the first loaf.

8. Bake For the next step, please be careful not to let your hands, fingers, or forearms
touch the extremely hot Dutch oven.

Invert the proofed loaf onto a lightly floured countertop, keeping in mind that the top of

the loaf will be the side that was facing down while it was rising—the seam side.

Remove  the  preheated  Dutch  oven  from  your  kitchen  oven,  remove  the  lid,  and
carefully place the loaf in the Dutch oven seam side up. Cover and bake for 30 minutes,
then  uncover  and  bake  for  about  20  minutes,  until  medium  dark  brown  all  around  the
loaf. Check after 15 minutes of baking uncovered in case your oven runs hot.

Remove the Dutch oven and carefully tilt it to turn the loaf out. Let cool on a rack or
set  the  loaf  on  its  side  so  air  can  circulate  around  it.  Let  the  loaf  rest  for  at  least  20
minutes before slicing.

Walnut Levain Bread

WALNUT LEVAIN BREAD

At Ken’s Artisan Bakery, we’ve been making walnut bread in various shapes and sizes
since  the  bakery  opened,  from  loaves  to  big  rounds  to  crusty,  hearty  walnut  rolls  that
people mostly buy for breakfast. We lightly roast the walnuts before adding them to the
dough. The bread is delicious on its own and is sublime when toasted and slathered with
butter  and  honey.  We  deliver  torpedoes  of  our  walnut  bread  to  some  restaurants  who
then slice it, grill it, and pair it with cheese. At my bakery, we use walnut bread for a
sandwich with fromage blanc and fresh Bosc pears from Hood River. My friend Steve
Jones, who owns Cheese Bar here in Portland, loves this bread paired with Oregon Blue
or Caveman Blue cheese, both from Oregon’s Rogue Creamery. It’s also excellent with a
smear of fresh goat cheese. This bread is always best toasted.

THIS RECIPE MAKES 2 LOAVES, EACH ABOUT 1¾ POUNDS.
BULK FERMENTATION: About 5 hours
PROOF TIME: 12 to 14 hours
SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Feed the levain at 8 a.m., mix the final dough at 3 p.m., shape

into loaves at 8 p.m., proof the loaves in the refrigerator overnight, and
bake around 8 to 10 a.m. the next morning.

Levain
INGREDIENT
Mature, active levain
White flour
Whole wheat flour
Water

QUANTITY
100 g
400 g
100 g
400 g, 85ºF to 90ºF (29ºC to 32ºC)

 
⅓ cup + 1½ tbsp
3 cups + 2 tbsp
¾ cup + ½ tbsp
1¾ cups

Final Dough

INGREDIENT

White flour

FINAL DOUGH MIX
QUANTITY
740 g

Whole wheat flour 60 g

Water

620 g, 90ºF to 95ºF (32ºC
to 35ºC)

Baker’s Formula
QUANTITY IN
LEVAIN
160 g

40 g

 
5¾ cups
½ cup + 1
tbsp

2¾ cups

160 g

1 tbsp + 1

TOTAL RECIPE
QUANTITY
900 g

BAKER’S
PERCENTAGE
90%

100 g

780 g

10%

78%

22 g
Fine sea salt
Instant dried yeast 2 g
Walnut halves or
pieces
Levain

360 g

225 g

tsp
½ tsp
About 2
cups
1⅓ cups

0
0

0

 

22 g
2 g

225 g

 

2.2%
0.2%

22.5%

20%*

* The baker’s percentage for levain is the amount of flour in the levain expressed as a

percentage of the total flour in the recipe.

1a. Feed the levain About 24 hours after your previous feeding of the levain, discard
all but 100 grams of levain, leaving the remainder in your 6-quart tub. Add 400 grams of
white flour, 100 grams of whole wheat flour, and 400 grams of water at 85°F to 90°F
(29°C  to  32°C)  and  mix  by  hand  just  until  incorporated.  Cover  and  let  rest  at  room
temperature for 6 to 8 hours before mixing the final dough.

1b.  Roast  the  nuts  At  least  1  hour  before  autolysing,  preheat  the  oven  to  400°F
(205°C). Put the walnuts in an ovenproof skillet or baking pan and roast for about 12
minutes, until medium dark brown. Let cool to room temperature.

1c.  Autolyse  Between  6  and  8  hours  after  feeding  the  levain,  mix  the  740  grams  of
white flour and the 60 grams of whole wheat flour by hand in a 12-quart round tub. Add
the  620  grams  of  90°F  to  95°F  (32°C  to  35°C)  water  and  mix  by  hand  just  until
incorporated. Cover and let rest for 20 to 30 minutes.

2. Mix the final dough Sprinkle the 22 grams of salt and the 2 grams (½ teaspoon) of
yeast evenly over the top of the dough.

Put a container with about a finger’s depth of warm water on your scale so you can
easily remove the levain after it’s weighed. With wet hands, transfer 360 grams of levain
into the container.

Transfer the weighed levain to the 12-quart dough tub, minimizing the amount of water
transferred with it. Mix by hand, wetting your working hand before mixing so the dough
doesn’t  stick  to  you. Use the pincer method alternating with folding the dough to fully
integrate the ingredients. The target dough temperature at the end of the mix is 77°F to
78°F (25°C to 26°C).

Let  the  dough  rest  for  10  minutes,  then  spread  the  cooled  walnuts  over  the  top.
Incorporate them into the dough, again using the pincer method alternating with folding
until the walnuts are evenly distributed.

3. Fold This dough needs three folds (see here). It’s easiest to apply the folds during the
first 1½ to 2 hours after mixing the dough.

When the dough is about 2½ times its original volume, about 5 hours after mixing, it’s

ready to be divided.

4. Divide  With  floured  hands,  gently  ease  the  dough  out  of  the  tub  and  onto  a  lightly
floured work surface. With your hands still floured, pick up the dough and ease it back
down onto the work surface in a somewhat even shape. Use a bit of flour to dust the area
in the middle where you’ll cut the dough, then cut it into 2 equal-size pieces with a dough
knife or plastic dough scraper.

5. Shape Dust 2 proofing baskets with flour. Shape each piece of dough into a medium-
tight ball following these instructions. Place each seam side down in its proofing basket.

6. Proof Place each basket in a nonperforated plastic bag and refrigerate overnight.

The  next  morning,  12  to  14  hours  after  the  loaves  went  into  the  refrigerator,  they
should be ready to bake, straight from the refrigerator. They don’t need to come to room
temperature first.

7. Preheat At least 45 minutes prior to baking, put a rack in the middle of the oven and
put 2 Dutch ovens on the rack with their lids on. Preheat the oven to 475°F (245°C).

If you only have 1 Dutch oven, keep the other loaf in the refrigerator while the first
loaf is baking, and bake the loaves sequentially, giving the Dutch oven a 5-minute reheat
after removing the first loaf.

8. Bake For the next step, please be careful not to let your hands, fingers, or forearms
touch the extremely hot Dutch oven.

Invert the proofed loaf onto a lightly floured countertop, keeping in mind that the top of

the loaf will be the side that was facing down while it was rising—the seam side.

Remove  the  preheated  Dutch  oven  from  your  kitchen  oven,  remove  the  lid,  and
carefully place the loaf in the Dutch oven seam side up. Cover and bake for 30 minutes,
then  uncover  and  bake  for  about  20  minutes,  until  medium  dark  brown  all  around  the
loaf. Check after 15 minutes of baking uncovered in case your oven runs hot.

Remove the Dutch oven and carefully tilt it to turn the loaf out. Let cool on a rack or
set  the  loaf  on  its  side  so  air  can  circulate  around  it.  Let  the  loaf  rest  for  at  least  20
minutes before slicing.

FIELD BLEND #1

I’m borrowing a term from the wine world, where field blend implies multiple varieties
of grapes grown at the same vineyard, combined to produce a single wine. This practice
has long been part of the winemaking tradition in Alsace, among other regions. Here I
use the term to refer to a bread made with white and whole wheat flours plus white rye
flour, which is sometimes labeled “light rye flour,” and is just rye flour without the bran
or germ (just like white wheat flour). This bread offers a complexity of flavor distinctly
its own: influenced happily and not too heavily by the rye, without losing the lightness of
a bread made primarily from wheat flour. The next recipe, Field Blend Levain #2 is a
darker,  earthier  loaf  that  uses  a  bit  more  whole  wheat  flour,  and  either  whole  rye  or
pumpernickel rye flour rather than white rye.

This is an excellent sandwich bread. You might also think of it as an accent flavor
anywhere you use anything smoked, from smoked salt to smoked fish to smoked meats. If
I  were  to  try  to  build  a  New York  pastrami-on-rye  sandwich  empire,  this  first  Field
Blend recipe is the bread I would use, tossing some caraway seeds into the dough.

THIS RECIPE MAKES 2 LOAVES, EACH ABOUT 1½ POUNDS.
BULK FERMENTATION: About 5 hours
PROOF TIME: About 12 hours
SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Feed the levain at 8 a.m., mix the final dough at 3 p.m., shape

into loaves at 8 p.m., proof the loaves in the refrigerator overnight, and
bake at around 8 a.m. the next morning.

Levain
INGREDIENT
Mature, active levain
White flour
Whole wheat flour
Water

QUANTITY
100 g
400 g
100 g
400 g, 85ºF to 90ºF (29ºC to 32ºC)

 
⅓ cup + 1½ tbsp
3 cups + 2 tbsp
¾ cup + ½ tbsp
1¾ cups

Final Dough

INGREDIENT

FINAL DOUGH MIX
QUANTITY

White flour

590 g

Baker’s Formula
QUANTITY IN
LEVAIN

TOTAL RECIPE
QUANTITY

BAKER’S
PERCENTAGE

160 g

750 g

75%

 
4½ cups + 2
tbsp

Whole wheat
flour
White rye
flour

Water

60 g

150 g

½ cup + ½
tbsp

40 g

1½ cups

0

590 g, 90ºF to 95ºF (32ºC
to 35ºC)

2⅔ cups

160 g

Fine sea salt

21 g

Instant dried
yeast
Levain

2 g

360 g

1 tbsp + 1
scant tsp

½ tsp

1⅓ cups

0

0

 

100 g

150 g

750 g

21 g

2 g

 

10%

15%

75%

2.1%

0.2%

20%*

* The baker’s percentage for levain is the amount of flour in the levain expressed as a

percentage of the total flour in the recipe.

1a. Feed the levain About 24 hours after your previous feeding of the levain, discard
all but 100 grams of levain, leaving the remainder in your 6-quart tub. Add 400 grams of
white flour, 100 grams of whole wheat flour, and 400 grams of water at 85°F to 90°F
(29°C  to  32°C)  and  mix  by  hand  just  until  incorporated.  Cover  and  let  rest  at  room
temperature for 6 to 8 hours before mixing the final dough.

1b. Autolyse After  6  to  8  hours,  mix  the  590  grams  of  white  flour,  the  60  grams  of
whole wheat flour, and the 150 grams of white rye flour by hand in a 12-quart round tub.
Add the 590 grams of 90°F to 95°F (32°C to 35°C) water and mix by hand just until
incorporated. Cover and let rest for 20 to 30 minutes.

The rye flour will make this dough a little stickier than bread dough made without rye.

2. Mix the final dough Sprinkle the 21 grams of salt and the 2 grams (½ teaspoon) of
yeast evenly over the top of the dough.

Put a container with about a finger’s depth of warm water on your scale so you can
easily remove the levain after it’s weighed. With wet hands, transfer 360 grams of levain
into the container.

Transfer the weighed levain to the 12-quart dough tub, minimizing the amount of water
transferred with it. Mix by hand, wetting your working hand before mixing so the dough
doesn’t  stick  to  you. Use the pincer method alternating with folding the dough to fully
integrate the ingredients. The target dough temperature at the end of the mix is 77°F to
78°F (25°C to 26°C).

3. Fold This dough needs three or four folds (see here). It’s easiest to apply the folds
during the first 1½ to 2 hours after mixing the dough.

When the dough is about 2½ times its original volume, about 5 hours after mixing, it’s

ready to be divided.

4. Divide  With  floured  hands,  gently  ease  the  dough  out  of  the  tub  and  onto  a  lightly
floured work surface. With your hands still floured, pick up the dough and ease it back
down onto the work surface in a somewhat even shape. Use a bit of flour to dust the area
in the middle where you’ll cut the dough, then cut it into 2 equal-size pieces with a dough
knife or plastic dough scraper.

5. Shape Doughs made with rye flour are stickier and need a bit more strengthening than
doughs made without. To compensate, “preshape” your dough first: Sprinkle a little flour
over the top of each piece, then flip them over, flour side down, and fold the dough by
reaching  under  the  mass  and  pulling  floured  sections  of  the  dough  over  and  across,
eventually  enclosing  the  sticky  inner  surface  of  the  dough.  Then,  shape  each  piece  of
dough into a tight ball following these instructions. Place them on the counter seam side
down and let rest for about 15 minutes.

After  the  preshape  step,  dust  2  proofing  baskets  with  flour.  Once  again  shape  each

piece of dough into a tight ball. Place each seam side down in its proofing basket.

6. Proof Place each basket in a nonperforated plastic bag and refrigerate overnight.

The  next  morning,  about  12  hours  after  the  loaves  went  into  the  refrigerator,  they
should be ready to bake, straight from the refrigerator. They don’t need to come to room
temperature first.

7. Preheat At least 45 minutes prior to baking, put a rack in the middle of the oven and
put 2 Dutch ovens on the rack with their lids on. Preheat the oven to 475°F (245°C).

If you only have 1 Dutch oven, keep the other loaf in the refrigerator while the first
loaf is baking, and bake the loaves sequentially, giving the Dutch oven a 5-minute reheat
after removing the first loaf.

8. Bake For the next step, please be careful not to let your hands, fingers, or forearms
touch the extremely hot Dutch oven.

Invert the proofed loaf onto a lightly floured countertop, keeping in mind that the top of

the loaf will be the side that was facing down while it was rising—the seam side.

Remove  the  preheated  Dutch  oven  from  your  kitchen  oven,  remove  the  lid,  and
carefully place the loaf in the Dutch oven seam side up. Cover and bake for 30 minutes,
then uncover and bake for about 20 minutes, until dark brown all around the loaf. Check
after 15 minutes of baking uncovered in case your oven runs hot.

Remove the Dutch oven and carefully tilt it to turn the loaf out. Let cool on a rack or
set  the  loaf  on  its  side  so  air  can  circulate  around  it.  Let  the  loaf  rest  for  at  least  20
minutes before slicing.

Field Blend #2

FIELD BLEND #2

This second Field Blend of wheat and rye flours is in this book for two reasons: it has a
different personality thanks to the use of whole rye or pumpernickel rye flour instead of
the white rye flour used in Field Blend #1; and it helps show how you can adjust the
flour in these recipes to make a Field Blend with whatever ratio of flours you want to
use.

When you are shopping for flour, whole rye flour is often labeled “dark rye flour.”

Pumpernickel rye flour is whole rye, coarsely ground.

The  result  is  bread  that’s  a  bit  darker  and  slightly  earthier  in  flavor  than  the Field
Blend #1. Both of these recipes use the same total amount of flour as every other recipe
in this book: 1,000 grams. The levain contributes 200 grams of flour; the remaining 800
grams, used in the final dough, are a “dealer’s choice” blend that can be customized as
you wish.

I particularly like the blend of flours in this recipe. It includes about as much rye flour
as  you  can  work  into  the  dough  without  losing  all  the  texture  and  volume  of  a  wheat
bread.

THIS RECIPE MAKES 2 LOAVES, EACH ABOUT 1½ POUNDS, AND IS SUITABLE FOR FOCACCIA.
BULK FERMENTATION: About 5 hours
PROOF TIME: 11 to 12 hours
SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Feed the levain at 8 a.m., mix the final dough at 3 p.m., shape

into loaves at 8 p.m., proof the loaves in the refrigerator overnight, and
bake around 7 or 8 a.m. the next morning.

Levain
INGREDIENT
Mature, active levain
White flour
Whole wheat flour
Water

QUANTITY
100 g
400 g
100 g
400 g, 85ºF to 90ºF (29ºC to 32ºC)

 
⅓ cup + 1½ tbsp
3 cups + 2 tbsp
¾ cup + ½ tbsp
1¾ cups

Final Dough

INGREDIENT

White flour

FINAL DOUGH MIX
QUANTITY
540 g

 

Baker’s Formula
QUANTITY IN
LEVAIN
160 g

TOTAL RECIPE
QUANTITY
700 g

BAKER’S
PERCENTAGE
70%

Whole rye
flour
Whole wheat
flour

Water

175 g

85 g

620 g, 90ºF to 95ºF (32ºC
to 35ºC)

Fine sea salt

21 g

Instant dried
yeast
Levain

2 g

360 g

4 cups + 3 tbsp
1¾ cups

0

⅔ cup

2¾ cups

1 tbsp + 1
scant tsp

½ tsp

1⅓ cups

40 g

160 g

0

0

 

175 g

125 g

780 g

21 g

2 g

 

17.5%

12.5%

78%

2.1%

0.2%

20%*

* The baker’s percentage for levain is the amount of flour in the levain expressed as a

percentage of the total flour in the recipe.

1a. Feed the levain About 24 hours after your previous feeding of the levain, discard
all but 100 grams of levain, leaving the remainder in your 6-quart tub. Add 400 grams of
white flour, 100 grams of whole wheat flour, and 400 grams of water at 85°F to 90°F
(29°C  to  32°C)  and  mix  by  hand  just  until  incorporated.  Cover  and  let  rest  at  room
temperature for 6 to 8 hours before mixing the final dough.

1b. Autolyse After  6  to  8  hours,  mix  the  540  grams  of  white  flour,  the  85  grams  of
whole wheat flour, and the 175 grams of whole rye flour by hand in a 12-quart round tub.
Add the 620 grams of 90°F to 95°F (32°C to 35°C) water and mix by hand just until
incorporated. Cover and let rest for 20 to 30 minutes.

The rye flour will make this dough a little stickier than bread dough made without rye.

2. Mix the final dough Sprinkle the 21 grams of salt and the 2 grams (½ teaspoon) of
yeast evenly over the top of the dough.

Put a container with about a finger’s depth of warm water on your scale so you can
easily remove the levain after it’s weighed. With wet hands, transfer 360 grams of levain
into the container.

Transfer the weighed levain to the 12-quart dough tub, minimizing the amount of water
transferred with it. Mix by hand, wetting your working hand before mixing so the dough
doesn’t  stick  to  you. Use the pincer method alternating with folding the dough to fully
integrate the ingredients. The target dough temperature at the end of the mix is 77°F to
78°F (25°C to 26°C).

3. Fold This dough needs three or four folds (see here). It’s easiest to apply the folds
during the first 1½ to 2 hours after mixing the dough.

When the dough is about 2½ times its original volume, about 5 hours after mixing, it’s

ready to be divided.

4. Divide  With  floured  hands,  gently  ease  the  dough  out  of  the  tub  and  onto  a  lightly
floured work surface. With your hands still floured, pick up the dough and ease it back
down onto the work surface in a somewhat even shape. Use a bit of flour to dust the area
in the middle where you’ll cut the dough, then cut it into 2 equal-size pieces with a dough
knife or plastic dough scraper.

5. Shape Doughs made with rye flour are stickier and need a bit more strengthening than
doughs made without. To compensate, “preshape” your dough first: Sprinkle a little flour
over the top of each piece, then flip them over, flour side down, and fold the dough by
reaching  under  the  mass  and  pulling  floured  sections  of  the  dough  over  and  across,
eventually  enclosing  the  sticky  inner  surface  of  the  dough.  Then,  shape  each  piece  of
dough into a tight ball following these instructions. Place them on the counter seam side
down and let rest for about 15 minutes.

After  the  preshape  step,  dust  2  proofing  baskets  with  flour.  Once  again  shape  each

piece of dough into a tight ball. Place each seam side down in its proofing basket.

6. Proof Place each basket in a nonperforated plastic bag and refrigerate overnight.

The  next  morning,  11  to  12  hours  after  the  loaves  went  into  the  refrigerator,  they
should be ready to bake, straight from the refrigerator. They don’t need to come to room
temperature first.

7. Preheat At least 45 minutes prior to baking, put a rack in the middle of the oven and
put 2 Dutch ovens on the rack with their lids on. Preheat the oven to 475°F (245°C).

If you only have 1 Dutch oven, keep the other loaf in the refrigerator while the first
loaf is baking, and bake the loaves sequentially, giving the Dutch oven a 5-minute reheat
after removing the first loaf.

8. Bake For the next step, please be careful not to let your hands, fingers, or forearms
touch the extremely hot Dutch oven.

Invert the proofed loaf onto a lightly floured countertop, keeping in mind that the top of

the loaf will be the side that was facing down while it was rising—the seam side.

Remove  the  preheated  Dutch  oven  from  your  kitchen  oven,  remove  the  lid,  and
carefully place the loaf in the Dutch oven seam side up. Cover and bake for 30 minutes,
then uncover and bake for about 20 minutes, until dark brown all around the loaf. Check
after 15 minutes of baking uncovered in case your oven runs hot.

Remove the Dutch oven and carefully tilt it to turn the loaf out. Let cool on a rack or
set  the  loaf  on  its  side  so  air  can  circulate  around  it.  Let  the  loaf  rest  for  at  least  20

minutes before slicing.

The 3-Kilo Boule

It’s Wednesday, and this big, round  boule of levain bread baked Monday morning
—about 16 inches in diameter and weighing in at more than 6 pounds—may be at
its best right now. Like all of my big levain loaves, the 3-kilo boule improves with
age for several days after it’s been baked. There’s something unique about the way
flavors  develop  in  big  loaves.  The  flavors  integrate  and  mellow  with  time,  the
crumb remains soft, and the crust stays firm yet pliable. I love the variety of textures
in  this  monster.  The  rich,  earthy,  sometimes  slightly  bitter  flavor  of  the  crust
fascinates  me  when  I  think  of  the  field  of  wheat  it  came  from.  The  ingredients?
Flour, water, salt, and yeast. Bet you saw that coming.

Breads of this size probably date back to times when people only had access to
fresh bread one or two days each week and needed loaves large enough to last until
the next baking day. There’s a connection to European village life, back to when
bread was a dietary staple. Many villages weren’t big enough to support a bakery
that was open every day of the week. Some villages had a communal oven that was
fired once a week. Bread had to last until the next bake day, so the loaves were big
—I mean really big. I have books with old photos of loaves that appear to be at
least 3 feet in diameter. Prior to the twentieth century, bread made up a significant
percentage  of  the  calories  in  the  average  European  diet.  Back  then,  bread  and
baking were important in a way that’s hard to imagine today.

There  remain  many  bakeries,  mine  included,  that  still  bake  large  loaves  for
people who do not have everyday access to a bakery, or who know from experience
that large loaves yield superior bread. In my case, almost all of these big fellas are
delivered to a handful of good restaurants here in Portland.

I am fond of these large loaves for their historical link to a baking heritage that
inspired my métier, and the 3-kilo (6.6-pound) boule of Country Blonde is the one
bread I can truly call my own. I came up with the recipe for the bakery’s Country
Brown bread to try to match loaves baked by the French bakers who inspired me—
Poilâne, Poujauran, Kamir, Saibron, and other excellent Parisian bakers—despite
the differences between the types of flour available in the United States and France.
Country Brown is one of my personal favorites in 1.75-kilo (3.9-pound) boules, but
the 3-kilo Country Blonde boule came more directly from my own inspiration and I
therefore feel it is more my own bread, not my version of someone else’s bread.

In  2004,  I  traveled  back  to  Paris  for  my  first  vacation  since  opening  Ken’s
Artisan Bakery. It was an opportunity to revisit the boulangeries that made me want
to become a baker—and to give some long thought to the work we were doing in
Portland. I wanted to make some changes to our Country Blonde bread, and on a
long  walk  along  the  river  Seine,  I  reflected  on  two  principles:  our  big  loaves
almost  always  taste  better  than  our  smaller  loaves;  and  my  “less  yeast  and  more
time” mantra could be applied to make the Country Blonde more delicate and more
complex in flavor. I also wanted to adopt a common practice among good French
bakers:  using  a  small  percentage  of  rye  flour  to  add  earthiness  and  additional
complexity to the flavor of the bread.

After I got home I tinkered with flour proportions (at the time I used four kinds of
flour  in  the  Country  Blonde  dough),  the  amount  of  levain  and  yeast,  the  timing,
dough  temperatures,  and  dough  hydration.  Meanwhile,  I  also  experimented  with
large loaf sizes, going all the way up to 4 kilos of raw dough before finally deciding
that the 3-kilo boule was ideal for several reasons—one deciding factor being the
fact that anything bigger than a 3-kilo loaf wouldn’t fit in our delivery bags!

We bake the Country Blonde boules to a very deep, dark color, sometimes just
shy of being burned, in order to get a very particular hit of flavor in the crust. When
fully  fermented  and  completely  baked,  these  loaves  take  on  shades  of  umber  and
dark crimson that aren’t in the typical American’s color palette for bread. But the
flavor! Oh yeah. And the contrast in both taste and texture between the crust and the
light alveolated crumb is sublime.

I started taking the big loaves of Country Blonde around to some of my friends at

restaurants  in  Portland,  and  before  long  we  were  sending  ten  to  fifteen  of  these
behemoths to restaurants around town every day. Persuading the public to buy such
big loaves is another story. Most people just don’t eat that much bread, so we sell
the 3-kilo boules in quarters at the bakery.

In France, a big round loaf is sometimes called a miche, sometimes a boule (this
is where the word boulangerie came from). The way this bread is used varies with
its  age,  and  some  families  won’t  even  touch  the  loaf  until  its  second  day.  The
rhythm of each week’s meals is sometimes determined, at least in part, by the age of
the bread. Early on, it eats well plain, on its own or accompanying other foods. At
any point in its life cycle, it’s superb when toasted, giving it an ideal crisp outer
layer  with  tender  middle  bits.  But  its  uses  get  more  interesting  with  age:  bread
puddings both savory and sweet, including one of my favorites, summer pudding,
made with fresh berries and topped with crème fraîche or whipped cream; slices or
chunks of toasted bread topped with soup or stew; bread crumbs, of course, as a
topping, in fillings, or for coating battered foods before frying; or, for the ambitious,
in winter, as a topping for cassoulet. Of course there are also croutons and crostini,
topped with anything you can imagine. Recently I came across an Italian recipe for
bread  balls  that  sounds  great:  old  bread  pieces  soaked  overnight  in  milk,  then
squeezed out and mixed with a custard of milk, eggs, grated Parmesan, and chopped
sage; finally, the mixture is formed into balls and deep-fried. Yum! Peasant food
excels at using old bread to good advantage, letting nothing go to waste.

On a recent vacation in Montana where I rented a ranch house in the Centennial
Valley, I brought two  boules of Country Blonde, one for my hosts and the other to
get me through seven days of cooking my own meals. Seven days after it was baked,
I  was  still  enjoying  the  bread  for  toast,  croutons,  and  any  other  kind  of  wheaty
ballast. I also soaked some torn pieces in cream and sugar and topped them with
berries for a dessert.

If  you’re  lucky  enough  to  get  your  hands  on  this  kind  of  large  loaf,  you’ll
probably wonder what the best way to store it is. The ideal is to let it sit out for the
first day, then quarter it and store it at room temperature in a plastic bag for the
remainder of its life: up to eight days.

If you want to try baking the 3-kilo boule’s home kitchen cousin, the 1.8-kilo (4-
pound) boule, see the variation for Overnight Country Blonde, which you can also
apply to the dough for Overnight Country Brown.

Pain au Bacon.

CHAPTER 10
PURE LEVAIN DOUGHS

OVERNIGHT COUNTRY BLONDE

OVERNIGHT COUNTRY BROWN

PAIN AU BACON

Overnight Country Blonde

OVERNIGHT COUNTRY BLONDE

This is a pure levain dough that gets no help from store-bought yeast. It makes beautiful,
natural levain bread with just a bit of tang to it. Using a small amount of levain, the long
overnight  bulk  fermentation  allows  the  dough  to  become  nice  and  gassy  by  morning,
tripling in volume. The shaped loaves are then proofed for about four hours. The aroma
and flavor of this bread will directly reflect the character of your levain, with the flavors
improving and the acidity mellowing for a couple of days after baking.

At Ken’s Artisan Bakery we make a slightly different version of this dough. It begins
with  a  levain  feeding  at  3:30  a.m.,  so  I  didn’t  include  that  version  here,  for  obvious
reasons. However, this would be a great dough to use to make a scaled-down version of
my 3-kilo boule, as described at 1.8 kilos (4 pounds) total, the amount of dough in this
recipe will just barely fit on a standard baking stone for a home oven.

Be sure to bake this bread completely, letting it remain in the oven until it is as dark as
possible shy of burning. If you want an even chewier crust, leave the loaves in the oven
with the door partly open for a few minutes after turning off the oven.

Once you’ve perfected this bread, I encourage you to mix it up and try different blends
of flours in your final dough mix; just make sure the total amount of fresh flour is 880
grams to complement the 120 grams of flour in the levain. Another option is to fold in
about 225 grams of olives, nuts, or other ingredients, as in the recipe for Pain au Bacon.

THIS RECIPE MAKES 2 LOAVES, EACH ABOUT 1½ POUNDS, OR 1 BIG LOAF (SEE THE VARIATION).
BULK FERMENTATION: 12 to 15 hours
PROOF TIME: About 4 hours
SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Feed the levain at 9 a.m., mix the final dough at 5 p.m., shape

into loaves at 8 a.m. the next morning, and bake at noon.

Levain
INGREDIENT
Mature, active levain
White flour
Whole wheat flour
Water

Final Dough

QUANTITY
100 g
400 g
100 g
400 g, 85ºF to 90ºF (29ºC to 32ºC)

Baker’s Formula

 
⅓ cup + 1½ tbsp
3 cups + 2 tbsp
¾ cup + ½ tbsp
1¾ cups

FINAL DOUGH MIX
QUANTITY
804 g

 

6¼ cups

QUANTITY IN
LEVAIN
96 g

TOTAL RECIPE
QUANTITY
900 g

BAKER’S
PERCENTAGE
90%

INGREDIENT

White flour
Whole wheat
flour

Rye flour

Water

Fine sea salt

22 g

Levain

216 g**

26 g

50 g

684 g, 90ºF to 95ºF (32ºC to
35ºC)

3 tbsp

24 g

⅓ cup + 1
tbsp
Scant 3
cups
1 tbsp + 1
tsp
¾ cup + 1
tbsp

0

96 g

0

 

50 g

50 g

780 g

22 g

 

5%

5%

78%

2.2%

12%*

* The baker’s percentage for levain is the amount of flour in the levain expressed as a

percentage of the total flour in the recipe.

** If your kitchen is cooler than 70ºF (21ºC), increase the amount of levain, perhaps

using 250 to 275 grams.

1a. Feed the levain About 24 hours after your previous feeding of the levain, discard
all but 100 grams of levain, leaving the remainder in your 6-quart tub. Add 400 grams of
white flour, 100 grams of whole wheat flour, and 400 grams of water at 85°F to 90°F
(29°C  to  32°C)  and  mix  by  hand  just  until  incorporated.  Cover  and  let  rest  at  room
temperature for 7 to 9 hours before mixing the final dough.

1b. Autolyse After 7 to 9 hours, mix the 804 grams of white flour, the 50 grams of rye
flour, and the 26 grams of whole wheat flour by hand in a 12-quart round tub. Add the
684  grams  of  90°F  to  95°F  (32°C  to  35°C)  water  and  mix  by  hand  just  until
incorporated. Cover and let rest for 20 to 30 minutes.

2. Mix the final dough Sprinkle the 22 grams of salt evenly over the top of the dough.

Put a container with about a finger’s depth of warm water on your scale so you can
easily remove the levain after it’s weighed. With wet hands, transfer 216 grams (or more
if your kitchen is cool; see “Seasonal Variations”) of levain into the container.

Transfer the weighed levain to the 12-quart dough tub, minimizing the amount of water
transferred with it. Mix by hand, wetting your working hand before mixing so the dough
doesn’t  stick  to  you. Use the pincer method alternating with folding the dough to fully
integrate the ingredients. The target dough temperature at the end of the mix is 77°F to
78°F (25°C to 26°C).

3. Fold  This  dough  needs  three  or  four  folds  (see Step  3:  Fold  the  Dough).  Because
overnight levain dough expands very slowly, it can be folded anytime that’s convenient
before you go to bed, perhaps doing two or three folds during the first hour and the final
fold whenever convenient that evening.

When the dough is nearly triple its original volume, or possibly a bit less in winter, 12

to 15 hours after mixing, it’s ready to be divided.

4. Divide  With  floured  hands,  gently  ease  the  dough  out  of  the  tub  and  onto  a  lightly
floured work surface. With your hands still floured, pick up the dough and ease it back
down onto the work surface in a somewhat even shape. Use a bit of flour to dust the area
in the middle where you’ll cut the dough, then cut it into 2 equal-size pieces with a dough
knife or plastic dough scraper.

5. Shape the dough Dust 2 proofing baskets with flour. Shape each piece of dough
into a medium-tight ball following these instructions. Place each seam side down in its
proofing basket.

6.  Proof  Set  the  baskets  side  by  side  and  cover  with  a  kitchen  towel,  or  place  each
basket in a nonperforated plastic bag. Proofing time should be about 4 hours, assuming a
room temperature of about 70°F (21°C). Use the finger-dent test to determine when they
are perfectly proofed and ready to bake.

7. Preheat At least 45 minutes prior to baking, put a rack in the middle of the oven and
put 2 Dutch ovens on the rack with their lids on. Preheat the oven to 475°F (245°C).

If  you  only  have  1  Dutch  oven,  put  the  second  loaf  into  the  refrigerator  about  20
minutes before baking the first loaf and bake the loaves sequentially, giving the Dutch

oven a 5-minute reheat after removing the first loaf.

8. Bake For the next step, please be careful not to let your hands, fingers, or forearms
touch the extremely hot Dutch oven.

Invert the proofed loaf onto a lightly floured countertop, keeping in mind that the top of

the loaf will be the side that was facing down while it was rising—the seam side.

Remove  the  preheated  Dutch  oven  from  your  kitchen  oven,  remove  the  lid,  and
carefully place the loaf in the Dutch oven seam side up. Cover and bake for 30 minutes,
then uncover and bake for 20 to 25 minutes, until medium dark brown to very dark brown
all around the loaf. Check after 15 minutes of baking uncovered in case your oven runs
hot.

Remove the Dutch oven and carefully tilt it to turn the loaf out. Let cool on a rack or
set  the  loaf  on  its  side  so  air  can  circulate  around  it.  Let  the  loaf  rest  for  at  least  20
minutes before slicing.

PROOFING PURE LEVAIN LOAVES

The finger-dent test may indicate that the loaves are proofed after about 3¼ hours.
At my house at 70ºF (21ºC), the window for compete proofing is between about 3½
and 4¼ hours. Initially, I found that the bread baked nicely after a 3-hour proof, but
further test bakes had better flavor with a full 4-hour proof, and the loaves didn’t
deflate.

VARIATION: THE 1.8-KILO BOULE

If  you  want  to  try  making  a  smaller  version  of  my  3-kilo
boule,  shape  the  entire  amount  of  dough  in  this  recipe
(about  1.8  kilos)  into  a  single  round  loaf  using  the  same
shaping  technique  used  for  the  smaller  round  loaves
throughout this book (see Step 5: Shape the Loaves). This
1.8-kilo loaf will be about the same size as a Poilâne miche.

Moderately  flour  a  lint-free  kitchen  towel  about  14  to  16
inches  wide,  or  a  couple  of  overlapped  kitchen  towels  if
needed.  Place  the  dough  seam  side  down  on  the  towels,

dust the top with flour, and cover by lifting the edges of the
towel over the dough from opposite sides. The towel should
completely  overlap  the  dough  without  wrapping  it  too
tightly; leave about 1 inch of slack on either side to allow
the dough to expand. Proof at room temperature for 4½ to
5 hours.

At least 45 minutes prior to baking, put a rack in the middle
of  the  oven  and  put  a  second  rack  below  it,  near  the
bottom of the oven. Put a pizza stone on the middle rack
and preheat the oven to 500ºF (260ºC). Immerse a second
pizza  stone  in  hot  water,  also  for  45  minutes;  if  it’s  lying
flat,  turn  it  over  after  about  20  minutes.  About  5  minutes
before  baking  the  loaf,  put  the  wet  pizza  stone  on  the
lowest oven rack to provide steam.

It isn’t necessary to score the loaf, but it is preferable, so if
you  have  a  scoring  blade  score  a  square  around  the
perimeter  of  the  loaf,  with  overlapping  strokes.  Use  a
floured  pizza  peel  to  load  the  big  loaf  onto  the  dry,
preheated  pizza  stone,  seam  side  up.  After  5  minutes,
lower the oven temperature to 475ºF (245ºC). Bake for 35
to  40  minutes,  but  check  at  the  30  minute  mark  in  case
your oven runs hot. (When you open the oven, be prepared
for  a  blast  of  steam.)  Your  loaf  is  done  when  the  crust  is
baked to a dark brown. Turn off the oven, open the door a
few  inches,  and  let  the  loaf  sit  in  the  oven  for  a  few
minutes  to  help  set  the  crust.  As  usual,  let  the  loaf  cool,
either on a rack or propped on its side, before slicing.

Overnight Country Brown

OVERNIGHT COUNTRY BROWN

This recipe is modeled after the original Country Brown bread we made daily at Ken’s
Artisan  Bakery  in  the  early  days.  This  is  a  good  example  of  how  to  make  a  long-
fermented pure levain dough that has mellow flavors and a gentle tang (rather than being
sour) and a very pleasant, rustic look and taste. The chew of the crust from this loaf is
particularly satisfying, and the way the crust flavors permeate into the crumb is soulful—
provided you bake the bread until you get dark chestnut colors all over.

If you want to have a go at making a bread that is similar in size, color, and style to
pain  Poilâne,  try  using  the  entire  1.8  kilos  of  dough  to  make  a  single,  large boule,
following the instructions in the Overnight Country Blonde variation.

THIS RECIPE MAKES 2 LOAVES, EACH ABOUT 1½ POUNDS, OR 1 BIG LOAF (SEE THE VARIATION).
BULK FERMENTATION: 12 to 15 hours
PROOF TIME: About 4 hours
SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Feed the levain at 9 a.m., mix the final dough at 5 p.m., shape

into loaves at 8 a.m. the next morning, and bake at noon.

Levain
INGREDIENT
Mature, active levain
White flour
Whole wheat flour
Water

QUANTITY
100 g
400 g
100 g
400 g, 85ºF to 90ºF (29ºC to 32ºC)

 
⅓ cup + 1½ tbsp
3 cups + 2 tbsp
¾ cup + ½ tbsp
1¾ cups

Final Dough

INGREDIENT

White flour
Whole wheat
flour

Water

FINAL DOUGH MIX
QUANTITY
604 g

276 g

684 g, 90ºF to 95ºF (32ºC to
35ºC)

Fine sea salt

22 g

Levain

216 g**

 
4⅔ cups
2 cups + 2
tbsp
Scant 3
cups
1 tbsp + 1
tsp
¾ cup + 1
tbsp

Baker’s Formula
QUANTITY IN
LEVAIN
96 g

TOTAL RECIPE
QUANTITY
700 g

BAKER’S
PERCENTAGE
70%

24 g

96 g

0

 

300 g

780 g

22 g

 

30%

78%

2.2%

12%*

* The baker’s percentage for levain is the amount of flour in the levain expressed as a

percentage of the total flour in the recipe.

** If your kitchen is cooler than 70ºF (21ºC), increase the amount of levain, perhaps

using 250 to 275 grams.

1a. Feed the levain About 24 hours after your previous feeding of the levain, discard
all but 100 grams of levain, leaving the remainder in your 6-quart tub. Add 400 grams of
white flour, 100 grams of whole wheat flour, and 400 grams of water at 85°F to 90°F
(29°C  to  32°C)  and  mix  by  hand  just  until  incorporated.  Cover  and  let  rest  at  room
temperature for 7 to 9 hours before mixing the final dough.

1b. Autolyse After 7 to 9 hours, mix the 604 grams of white flour and the 276 grams of
whole  wheat  flour  by  hand  in  a  12-quart  round  tub. Add  684  grams  of  90°F  to  95°F
(32°C to 35°C) water and mix by hand just until incorporated. Cover and let rest for 20
to 30 minutes.

2. Mix the final dough Sprinkle the 22 grams of salt evenly over the top of the dough.

Put a container with about a finger’s depth of warm water on your scale so you can
easily remove the levain after it’s weighed. With wet hands, transfer 216 grams (or more
if your kitchen is cool; see “Seasonal Variations”) of levain into the container.

Transfer the weighed levain to the 12-quart dough tub, minimizing the amount of water
transferred with it. Mix by hand, wetting your working hand before mixing so the dough
doesn’t  stick  to  you. Use the pincer method alternating with folding the dough to fully
integrate the ingredients. The target dough temperature at the end of the mix is 77°F to
78°F (25°C to 26°C).

3. Fold  This  dough  needs  three  or  four  folds  (see Step  3:  Fold  the  Dough).  Because
overnight levain dough expands very slowly, it can be folded anytime that’s convenient
before you go to bed, perhaps two or three folds during the first hour and the final fold
whenever convenient that evening.

When the dough is nearly triple in size, or possibly a bit less in winter, 12 to 15 hours

after mixing, it’s ready to be divided.

4. Divide  With  floured  hands,  gently  ease  the  dough  out  of  the  tub  and  onto  a  lightly
floured work surface. With your hands still floured, pick up the dough and ease it back
down onto the work surface in a somewhat even shape. Use a bit of flour to dust the area
in the middle where you’ll cut the dough, then cut it into 2 equal-size pieces with a dough

knife or plastic dough scraper.

5. Shape Dust 2 proofing baskets with flour. Shape each piece of dough into a medium-
tight ball following these instructions. Place each seam side down in its proofing basket.

6.  Proof  Set  the  baskets  side  by  side  and  cover  with  a  kitchen  towel,  or  place  each
basket in a nonperforated plastic bag. Proofing time should be about 4 hours, assuming a
room temperature of about 70°F (21°C). Use the finger-dent test to see determine when
they are perfectly proofed and ready to bake.

7. Preheat At least 45 minutes prior to baking, put a rack in the middle of the oven and
put 2 Dutch ovens on the rack with their lids on. Preheat the oven to 475°F (245°C).

If  you  only  have  1  Dutch  oven,  put  the  second  loaf  into  the  refrigerator  about  20
minutes before baking the first loaf and bake the loaves sequentially, giving the Dutch
oven a 5-minute reheat after removing the first loaf.

8. Bake For the next step, please be careful not to let your hands, fingers, or forearms
touch the extremely hot Dutch oven.

Invert the proofed loaf onto a lightly floured countertop, keeping in mind that the top of

the loaf will be the side that was facing down while it was rising—the seam side.

Remove  the  preheated  Dutch  oven  from  your  kitchen  oven,  remove  the  lid,  and
carefully place the loaf in the Dutch oven seam side up. Cover and bake for 30 minutes,
then uncover and bake for 20 to 25 minutes, until medium dark brown to very dark brown
all around the loaf. Check after 15 minutes of baking uncovered in case your oven runs
hot.

Remove the Dutch oven and carefully tilt it to turn the loaf out. Let cool on a rack or
set  the  loaf  on  its  side  so  air  can  circulate  around  it.  Let  the  loaf  rest  for  at  least  20
minutes before slicing.

Pain au Bacon

PAIN AU BACON

Earlier  in  the  book  I  pointedly  wrote  about  how  the  craft  of  an  artisan  baker  is  most
evident when the ingredients are just flour, water, salt, and yeast. But man, this is great
as an indulgence! I chose an overnight levain dough here because it has more acidity than
the other doughs, which complements the fattiness of the bacon. Vitaly Paley, chef and
owner of the Portland restaurant Paley’s Place, wishes I would make this bread for him
every day. And after he suggested it for French toast, he recanted and said, “The bread is
too precious to cook with. I just want to eat it!”

This  bread  is  impressive  eaten  still  warm  from  the  oven  or  grilled.  It  soars  when
toasted and served with eggs and chilled cider or a glass of bubbly. It shines when made
into warm, crisp croutons for use in a salad vinaigrette. It sings tenor high notes in a BLT
sandwich  with  lemony  mayonnaise  and  fresh  ripe  tomatoes.  Toasted  bacon  bread
squares with steelhead roe, anyone? Or how about served with a traditional Maryland
oyster stew? If I was in Hawaii, I’d have it for breakfast with eggs and fresh papaya or
passion fruit. Here in Oregon, it goes great with roasted pears. Maybe the ultimate Elvis
sandwich would be this bacon bread with peanut butter and bananas. And more bacon.

This dough should have a slightly shorter overnight fermentation time than the other
pure levain doughs in this book. The bacon fat makes the yeast extra happy, so the dough
will develop more quickly.

THIS RECIPE MAKES 2 LOAVES, EACH ABOUT 1½ POUNDS.
BULK FERMENTATION: About 12 hours
PROOF TIME: 3½ to 4 hours
SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Feed the levain at 9 a.m., mix the final dough at 7 p.m., shape

into loaves between 7 a.m. and 8 a.m. the next morning, and bake at 11
a.m.

Levain
INGREDIENT
Mature, active levain
White flour
Whole wheat flour
Water

QUANTITY
100 g
400 g
100 g
400 g, 85ºF to 90ºF (29ºC to 32ºC)

 
⅓ cup + 1½ tbsp
3 cups + 2 tbsp
¾ cup + ½ tbsp
1¾ cups

Final Dough

INGREDIENT FINAL DOUGH MIX QUANTITY
White flour 864 g
Whole
wheat flour 16 g
Water
Fine sea
salt

20 g

 
6¾ cups

2 tbsp

1 tbsp + ¾ tsp

684 g, 90ºF to 95ºF (32ºC to 35ºC) Scant 3 cups

Bacon

Levain

Cooked crisp bacon (500 g
uncooked), with 2 tbsp bacon fat
216 g**

Yield from 1 lb uncooked,
with 2 tbsp bacon fat
¾ cup + 1 tbsp

Baker’s Formula
QUANTITY
IN LEVAIN
96 g

TOTAL RECIPE
QUANTITY
960 g

BAKER’S
PERCENTAGE
96%

24 g

96 g

0

0

 

40 g

780 g

20 g

500 g
uncooked
 

4%

78%

2%

50%

12%*

* The baker’s percentage for levain is the amount of flour in the levain expressed as a

percentage of the total flour in the recipe.

** If your kitchen is cooler than 70ºF (21ºC), increase the amount of levain, perhaps

using 250 to 275 grams.

1a. Feed the levain About 24 hours after your previous feeding of the levain, discard
all but 100 grams of levain, leaving the remainder in your 6-quart tub. Add 400 grams of
white flour, 100 grams of whole wheat flour, and 400 grams of water at 85°F to 90°F
(29°C  to  32°C)  and  mix  by  hand  just  until  incorporated.  Cover  and  let  rest  at  room
temperature for 9 to 10 hours before mixing the final dough.

1b.  Cook  the  bacon At  least  20  minutes  before  autolysing,  sauté  the  500  grams  of
bacon  until  crisp.  Drain  on  paper  towels  and  reserve  2  tablespoons  of  the  rendered
bacon fat. Let cool to room temperature, then crumble.

1c. Autolyse Between 9 and 10 hours after feeding the levain, mix the 864 grams of
white flour and the 605 grams of whole wheat flour by hand in a 12-quart round tub. Add
the  684  grams  of  90°F  to  95°F  (32°C  to  35°C)  water  and  mix  by  hand  just  until
incorporated. Cover and let rest for 20 to 30 minutes.

2. Mix the final dough Sprinkle the 20 grams of salt evenly over the top of the dough.

Put a container with about a finger’s depth of warm water on your scale so you can
easily remove the levain after it’s weighed. With wet hands, transfer 216 grams (or more
if your kitchen is cool; see “Seasonal Variations”) of levain into the container.

Transfer the weighed levain to the 12-quart dough tub, minimizing the amount of water
transferred with it. Mix by hand, wetting your working hand before mixing so the dough

doesn’t  stick  to  you. Use the pincer method alternating with folding the dough to fully
integrate the ingredients. The target dough temperature at the end of the mix is 77°F to
78°F (25°C to 26°C).

Let the dough rest for 10 minutes, then spread the 2 tablespoons of bacon fat over the
top  and  sprinkle  the  crumbled  bacon  evenly  over  the  top.  Incorporate  them  into  the
dough, again using the pincer method alternating with folding until the bacon and fat are
evenly distributed.

3. Fold This dough needs three or four folds (see Step 3: Fold the Dough). It’s easiest to
apply the folds during the first 1½ to 2 hours after mixing the dough.

When the dough is about triple its original volume, or possibly a little less in winter,

about 12 hours after mixing, it’s ready to be divided.

4. Divide  With  floured  hands,  gently  ease  the  dough  out  of  the  tub  and  onto  a  lightly
floured work surface. With your hands still floured, pick up the dough and ease it back
down onto the work surface in a somewhat even shape. Use a bit of flour to dust the area
in the middle where you’ll cut the dough, then cut it into 2 equal-size pieces with a dough
knife or plastic dough scraper.

5. Shape Dust 2 proofing baskets with flour. Shape each piece of dough into a medium-
tight ball following these instructions. Place each seam side down in its proofing basket.

6.  Proof  Set  the  baskets  side  by  side  and  cover  with  a  kitchen  towel,  or  place  each
basket in a nonperforated plastic bag. Proofing time should be 3½ to 4 hours, assuming a
room temperature of 70°F (21°C). Use the finger-dent test to see determine when they
are perfectly proofed and ready to bake.

7. Preheat At least 45 minutes prior to baking, put a rack in the middle of the oven and
put 2 Dutch ovens on the rack with their lids on. Preheat the oven to 475° (245°C)F.

If  you  only  have  1  Dutch  oven,  put  the  second  loaf  into  the  refrigerator  about  20
minutes before baking the first loaf and bake the loaves sequentially, giving the Dutch
oven a 5-minute reheat after removing the first loaf.

8. Bake For the next step, please be careful not to let your hands, fingers, or forearms
touch the extremely hot Dutch oven.

Invert the proofed loaf onto a lightly floured countertop, keeping in mind that the top of

the loaf will be the side that was facing down while it was rising—the seam side.

Remove  the  preheated  Dutch  oven  from  your  kitchen  oven,  remove  the  lid,  and
carefully place the loaf in the Dutch oven seam side up. Cover and bake for 30 minutes,
then uncover and bake for 20 minutes, until at least medium dark brown all around the

loaf and the bits of bacon studding the crust are completely crisped—maybe even a little
charred.

Remove the Dutch oven and carefully tilt it to turn the loaf out. Let cool on a rack or
set  the  loaf  on  its  side  so  air  can  circulate  around  it.  Let  the  loaf  rest  for  at  least  20
minutes before slicing, give a nod to Elvis, then enjoy.

White Flour Warm-Spot Levain.

CHAPTER 11
ADVANCED LEVAIN DOUGHS

DOUBLE-FED SWEET LEVAIN BREAD

WHITE FLOUR WARM-SPOT LEVAIN

DOUBLE-FED SWEET LEVAIN BREAD

This bread involves feeding the levain two times, just a few hours apart, before mixing
the final dough, a technique that I learned from Chad Robertson of Tartine Bakery when I
was learning to be a baker. The idea is to build up an active population of yeast in the
levain culture with two feedings using very warm water, in a way that limits the buildup
of sour flavors. You may notice a larger amount of levain here than in the other bread
recipes in this book, the reason being that this levain is less active at the time I introduce
it  into  the  dough  mix.  A  long,  slow  fermentation,  followed  by  retarding  the  loaves
overnight in the refrigerator, creates a bread with an excellent, sweetish levain flavor.
The first time I baked this bread in my home kitchen, I thought, “Oh yeah, this is really
good.” It has a slight musky levain odor to its crumb and a gentle warmth of fermentation
flavors that I find very pleasant, especially in the crusty slices.

When  you  are  ready  to  mix  the  final  dough,  I  recommend  sticking  your  nose  in  the
levain bucket and taking in a big, deep draft of its odor. It smells great. Almost, but not
quite, kind of like beer, with a slight edge of sour wheat. I wish I had the words.

THIS RECIPE MAKES 2 LOAVES, EACH ABOUT 1½ POUNDS.
BULK FERMENTATION: About 5 hours
PROOF TIME: 12 to 14 hours
SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Feed the levain at 7 a.m., feed it again at 10 a.m., mix the final

dough between 2 p.m. and 3 p.m., shape into loaves at 8 p.m., proof the
loaves in the refrigerator overnight, and bake around 8 to 10 a.m. the next
morning.

First Levain Feeding
INGREDIENT
Mature, active
levain

50 g

QUANTITY

White flour

Whole wheat
flour

Water

200 g

50 g

200 g, 95ºF
(35ºC)

Second Levain Feeding
INGREDIENT

 
Scant ¼ cup Levain from the first
1½ cups + 1
tbsp
⅓ cup + 1
tbsp

Whole wheat flour

feeding

White flour

QUANTITY

250 g

400 g

100 g

⅞ cup

Water

400 g, 85ºF to 90ºF (29ºC to
32ºC)

 

Scant 1 cup

3 cups + 2
tbsp
¾ cup + ½
tbsp

1¾ cups

Final Dough

INGREDIENT

FINAL DOUGH MIX
QUANTITY

White flour

660 g

Whole wheat
flour

40 g

Baker’s Formula
QUANTITY IN
LEVAIN

240 g

 
5 cups + 2
tbsp

⅓ cup

60 g

Water

540 g, 90ºF to 95ºF (32ºC to
35ºC)

2⅓ cups

240 g

Fine sea salt

20 g

Instant dried
yeast

Levain

2 g

540 g

1 tbsp + ¾
tsp

½ tsp

2 cups + 1
tbsp

0

0

 

TOTAL RECIPE
QUANTITY

BAKER’S
PERCENTAGE

900 g

100 g

780 g

20 g

2 g

 

90%

10%

78%

2%

0.20%

30%*

* The baker’s percentage for levain is the amount of flour in the levain expressed as a

percentage of the total flour in the recipe.

1a. Feed the levain About 24 hours after your previous feeding of the levain, discard
all but 50 grams of levain, leaving the remainder in your 6-quart tub. (This will look like
a  very  small  amount;  trust  the  process.) Add  200  grams  of  white  flour,  50  grams  of
whole wheat flour, and 200 grams of water at 95°F (35°C) and mix by hand just until
incorporated. Cover and let rest at room temperature for 3 hours.

1b. Feed the levain a second time After 3 hours, discard all but 250 grams of levain
from the first feeding. Add 400 grams of white flour, 100 grams of whole wheat flour,
and 400 grams water at 95°F (35°C) and mix by hand until just incorporated. Cover and
let rest for 4 to 5 hours before mixing the final dough.

1c. Autolyse After 3½ to 4½ hours, mix the 660 grams of white flour and the 40 grams
of whole wheat flour by hand in a 12-quart round tub. Add the 540 grams of 90°F to
95°F (32°C to 35°C) water and mix by hand just until incorporated. Cover and let rest
for 20 to 30 minutes.

2. Mix the final dough Sprinkle the 20 grams of salt and the 2 grams (½ teaspoon) of
yeast evenly over the top of the dough.

Put a container with about a finger’s depth of warm water on your scale so you can
easily remove the levain after it’s weighed. With wet hands, transfer 540 grams of levain
into the container.

Transfer the weighed levain to the 12-quart dough tub, minimizing the amount of water
transferred with it. Mix by hand, wetting your working hand before mixing so the dough

doesn’t  stick  to  you. Use the pincer method alternating with folding the dough to fully
integrate the ingredients. The target dough temperature at the end of the mix is 77°F to
78°F (25°C to 26°C).

3. Fold This dough needs four folds (see Step 3: Fold the Dough). It’s easiest to apply
the folds during the first 1½ to 2 hours after mixing the dough.

When the dough is about 2½ times its original volume, about 5 hours after mixing, it’s

ready to be divided.

4. Divide  With  floured  hands,  gently  ease  the  dough  out  of  the  tub  and  onto  a  lightly
floured work surface. With your hands still floured, pick up the dough and ease it back
down onto the work surface in a somewhat even shape. Use a bit of flour to dust the area
in the middle where you’ll cut the dough, then cut it into 2 equal-size pieces with a dough
knife or plastic dough scraper.

5. Shape Dust 2 proofing baskets with flour. Shape each piece of dough into a medium-
tight ball following these instructions. Place each seam side down in its proofing basket.

6. Proof Place each basket in a nonperforated plastic bag and refrigerate overnight.

The  next  morning,  12  to  14  hours  after  the  loaves  went  into  the  refrigerator,  they
should be ready to bake, straight from the refrigerator. They don’t need to come up to
room temperature first.

7. Preheat At least 45 minutes prior to baking, put a rack in the middle of the oven and
put 2 Dutch ovens on the rack with their lids on. Preheat the oven to 475°F (245°C).

If you only have 1 Dutch oven, keep the other loaf in the refrigerator while the first
loaf is baking, and bake the loaves sequentially, giving the Dutch oven a 5-minute reheat
after removing the first loaf.

8. Bake For the next step, please be careful not to let your hands, fingers, or forearms
touch the extremely hot Dutch oven.

Invert the proofed loaf onto a lightly floured countertop, keeping in mind that the top of

the loaf will be the side that was facing down while it was rising—the seam side.

Remove  the  preheated  Dutch  oven  from  your  kitchen  oven,  remove  the  lid,  and
carefully place the loaf in the Dutch oven seam side up. Cover and bake for 30 minutes,
then uncover and bake for 20 to 25 minutes, until medium dark brown all around the loaf.
Check after 15 minutes of baking uncovered in case your oven runs hot.

Remove the Dutch oven and carefully tilt it to turn the loaf out. Let cool on a rack or
set  the  loaf  on  its  side  so  air  can  circulate  around  it.  Let  the  loaf  rest  for  at  least  20
minutes before slicing.

White Flour Warm-Spot Levain

WHITE FLOUR WARM-SPOT LEVAIN

My inspiration for this bread came from a long-ago visit to a bakery in California that
used a stiff white levain held in a very warm part of their bakery. This levain, which the
bakery kept on a shelf behind the bread oven, had a beautiful domed top and a medium-
ripe, fruity smell that was very attractive. They made delicious sourdough baguettes from
this starter, and I wanted to someday try making bread from this kind of levain myself.

In this recipe, you build a levain culture that’s completely different from the one in the
other levain recipes. You can start with the same base levain, but in this case you’ll add
only white flour and use less water—only 70 percent hydration—so the consistency will
be  much  stiffer.  Then  the  levain  is  held  in  a  warm  spot—anywhere  from  about  85°F
(29°C) to 90°F (32°C) would be ideal. This bread is impressive, and it’s a fun way to
show that there are many ways to make up and ferment a levain culture.

The more days this culture is refreshed and allowed to live in its warm environment,
the more it will develop its own unique character. If you decide to develop the culture
for longer than outlined in this recipe, I recommend feeding it twice a day using the Day
1 schedule outlined below. You may choose to use this culture for other recipes in the
book, adjusting the amounts of flour and water in the final dough mix to compensate for
this  levain  having  a  lower  hydration  (70  percent)  than  the  book’s  normal  levain.  For
more details, see Making a Bread (or Pizza) Dough You Can Call Your Own,.

I think of this as a seasonal summer bread. The challenge is finding the right spot to
keep the levain at these warmer temperatures. I used my home oven with the light on and
the door slightly open and got a steady 85°F (29°C); with the door closed it hit 100°F
(38°C).  Don’t  forget  it’s  in  there  if  you  use  the  oven  for  baking  something  else!
Alternatively, you may have a spot that’s naturally warm, perhaps in the garage or on the
porch if it’s hot outside, which could be less risky than the oven.

THIS RECIPE MAKES 2 LOAVES, EACH ABOUT 1½ POUNDS.
BULK FERMENTATION: 5 to 6 hours
PROOF TIME: 11 to 12 hours
SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Day 1, feed the new levain at 9 a.m. and again at 6 p.m. Day 2,

feed the new levain at 9 a.m., mix the final dough at 3 p.m., shape into
loaves at 8 p.m., proof the loaves in the refrigerator overnight, and bake
around 7 or 8 a.m. the next morning.

DAY 1

First Levain Feeding
INGREDIENT
Mature, active
levain

White flour

Water

DAY 2

QUANTITY

 

50 g

250 g

175 g, 85ºF
(29ºC)

Second Levain Feeding
INGREDIENT
Levain from the first
feeding

White flour

Scant ¼ cup

1¾ cups + 3
tbsp

¾ cup

Water

QUANTITY

 

50 g

250 g

175 g, 80ºF
(27ºC)

Scant ¼ cup

1¾ cups + 3
tbsp

¾ cup

Third Levain Feeding
INGREDIENT
Levain from the second feeding
White flour
Water

Final Dough

INGREDIENT

FINAL DOUGH MIX
QUANTITY

White flour

750 g

Water
Fine sea salt
Instant dried
yeast

Levain

605 g, 80ºF (27ºC)
20 g

1 g

425 g

QUANTITY
100 g
500 g
350 g, 85ºF (29ºC)

 
⅓ cup + 1½ tbsp
3¾ cups + 2 tbsp
1½ cups

Baker’s Formula
QUANTITY IN
LEVAIN

250 g

175 g

 
5¾ cups + 1½
tbsp
2⅔ cups
1 tbsp + ¾ tsp 0

¼ tsp

1½ cups + 1
tbsp

0

 

TOTAL RECIPE
QUANTITY

BAKER’S
PERCENTAGE

1,000 g

780 g
20 g

1 g

 

100%

78%
2%

0.1%

25%*

* The baker’s percentage for levain is the amount of flour in the levain expressed as a

percentage of the total flour in the recipe.

1a. Feed the levain About 24 hours after your previous feeding of the levain, begin to
cultivate  your  new,  stiffer  culture.  Discard  all  but  50  grams  of  levain,  leaving  the
remainder in your 6-quart tub. Add 250 grams of white flour and 175 grams of water at
85°F (29°C) and mix by hand just until incorporated. Cover and let rest for 8 hours in a
very warm spot at 85°F to 90°F (29°C to 32°C).

1b. Feed the levain a second time After 8 hours, the levain should have grown to
three to four times its original volume and you will get a big hit of alcoholic perfume

when  you  remove  the  lid.  It’s  ripe!  The  levain  should  be  bubbly,  with  a  nice  web
structure inside, and in prime condition.

Discard all but 50 grams of the levain from the first feeding. Add 250 grams of white
flour  and  175  grams  of  80°F  (27°C)  water  and  mix  by  hand,  just  until  incorporated.
Cover and let rest in a very warm place overnight.

1c. Feed the levain a third time About 14 to 15 hours later, feed your levain again. It
should  be  similarly  developed—about  quadruple  its  original  volume.  You  will  get
another heady rush of fumes when you remove the lid.

Discard all but 100 grams of the levain from the second feeding. Add 500 grams of
white flour and 350 grams of 85°F (29°C) water and mix by hand just until incorporated.
Cover  and  let  rest  in  your  warm  spot  for  6  hours  before  mixing  the  final  dough.  The
levain should be up to the 2-quart line on your 6-quart tub.

1d. Autolyse After 5½ hours, combine the 750 grams of white flour and the 605 grams
of 80°F (27°C) water in a 12-quart round tub or similar container. Mix by hand just until
incorporated. Cover and let rest for 20 to 30 minutes.

2. Mix the final dough Sprinkle the 20 grams of salt and the 1 gram (¼ teaspoon) of
yeast evenly over the top of the dough.

Put a container with about a finger’s depth of warm water on your scale so you can
easily remove the levain after it’s weighed. With wet hands, transfer 425 grams of levain
into the container.

Transfer the weighed levain to the 12-quart dough tub, minimizing the amount of water
transferred with it. Mix by hand, wetting your working hand before mixing so the dough
doesn’t  stick  to  you. Use the pincer method alternating with folding the dough to fully
integrate the ingredients. The target dough temperature at the end of the mix is 77°F to
78°F (25°C to 26°C).

3. Fold This dough needs three or four folds (see Step 3: Fold the Dough). It’s easiest to
apply the folds during the first 1½ to 2 hours after mixing the dough.

When the dough is about 2½ times its original volume, 5 to 6 hours after mixing, it’s

ready to be divided.

4. Divide  With  floured  hands,  gently  ease  the  dough  out  of  the  tub  and  onto  a  lightly
floured work surface. With your hands still floured, pick up the dough and ease it back
down onto the work surface in a somewhat even shape. Use a bit of flour to dust the area
in the middle where you’ll cut the dough, then cut it into 2 equal-size pieces with a dough
knife or plastic dough scraper.

5. Shape Dust 2 proofing baskets with flour. Shape each piece of dough into a medium-
tight ball following these instructions. Place each seam side down in its proofing basket.

6. Proof Place each basket in a nonperforated plastic bag and refrigerate overnight.

The  next  morning,  11  to  12  hours  after  the  loaves  went  into  the  refrigerator,  they
should be ready to bake, straight from the refrigerator. They don’t need to come up to
room temperature first.

7. Preheat At least 45 minutes prior to baking, put a rack in the middle of the oven and
put 2 Dutch ovens on the rack with their lids on. Preheat the oven to 475°F (245°C).

If you only have 1 Dutch oven, keep the other loaf in the refrigerator while the first
loaf is baking, and bake the loaves sequentially, giving the Dutch oven a 5-minute reheat
after removing the first loaf.

8. Bake For the next step, please be careful not to let your hands, fingers, or forearms
touch the extremely hot Dutch oven.

Invert the proofed loaf onto a lightly floured countertop, keeping in mind that the top of

the loaf will be the side that was facing down while it was rising—the seam side.

Remove  the  preheated  Dutch  oven  from  your  kitchen  oven,  remove  the  lid,  and
carefully place the loaf in the Dutch oven seam side up. Cover and bake for 30 minutes,
then uncover and bake for 20 to 25 minutes, until medium dark brown all around the loaf.
Check after 15 minutes of baking uncovered in case your oven runs hot.

Remove the Dutch oven and carefully tilt it to turn the loaf out. Let cool on a rack or
set  the  loaf  on  its  side  so  air  can  circulate  around  it.  Let  the  loaf  rest  for  at  least  20
minutes before slicing.

If  you  want  to  store  your  remaining  levain  culture  and  do  not  plan  to  continue
feeding it, then put 300 grams or so in the refrigerator, following the procedures for
storing  a  levain.  This  culture  will  be  fine  for  restoring  into  this  book’s  normal
levain later.

Making a Bread (or Pizza) Dough You Can Call Your Own

You  can  think  of  this  book’s  recipes  as  templates  that  allow  you  to  adjust  flour
blends, the leavening, the timing, or the amount of water in a dough, for whatever
reason: 
timeline,
convenience, or if you’re like me, just for the fun of it, to see what happens.

taste,  physical  structure  (for  pizza  doughs  especially), 

Have it your way. The recipes in this book are adaptable, and I encourage you to

experiment with them to create breads or pizzas that are all your own.

That having been said, I also encourage you to first follow the recipes as written,
to build your confidence as a baker and get familiar with my recipes and methods.
Then, once you’ve been successful with these recipes and know what they produce,
you can customize to suit your own taste, pantry, or whimsy.

You  might  want  to  try  making  a  50  percent  whole  wheat  bread  based  on  my
Saturday 75% Whole Wheat Bread recipe. Or you might want to change that recipe
to include some rye flour, or you might decide to use just 20 percent whole wheat.
Perhaps you want to experiment with a liquid levain, using Pain de Campagne  or
any of my other levain breads as a starting point.

And even when you want to follow the recipes exactly, you may have life issues
pop out of nowhere that require an on-the-fly schedule adjustment. This happens to
most of us. In this essay, I provide tips and tricks that will allow you to adapt, even
to unforeseen circumstances. I’ll start with adjusting hydration level, then address
changing  the  blend  of  flours.  Next,  I’ll  discuss  how  you  can  modify  a  recipe’s
schedule. Then, for the advanced baker, I’ll discuss some options regarding levain.
I  have  also  included  some  notes  on  recipe  shorthand,  which  is  a  useful  way  to
document your work as you go, since the long elapsed timelines are easy to forget
(what time did I mix the dough?), especially if you want to refer to them for future
bakes.

You’ll note that volume conversions are omitted from these recipe tables. If you
really want to control the variables discussed in the sections that follow, you need
to measure your ingredients by weight, for accuracy’s sake.

CHANGING HYDRATION

A good candidate for changing dough hydration is the Overnight Pizza Dough with
Poolish.  That  recipe  has  75  percent  hydration.  But  you  might  want  to  change  the
hydration to 70 percent to get a stiffer dough—many will find a stiffer dough easier
to shape into a pizza than the softer, stickier 75 percent dough. I get that. And you
still get the poolish flavor benefit.

Adjusting  the  hydration  is  simple.  Put  less  water  in  the  dough!  Since  the  total
flour weight is 1,000 grams (as it is in every bread and pizza dough recipe in this
book), to change the hydration to 70 percent, simply change total water in the dough
from 750 grams to 700 grams (70 percent of the total flour weight). Use the same
poolish as in the original recipe and adjust the amount of water added in the final
dough  mix  to  200  grams.  That’s  it.  Because  this  dough  is  stiffer,  it  needs  only  a
single fold.

POOLISH PIZZA DOUGH WITH 70 PERCENT HYDRATION

Final Dough

INGREDIENT

White flour
Water

FINAL DOUGH MIX
QUANTITY
500 g
200 g, 105ºF (38ºC)

QUANTITY IN
POOLISH
500 g
500 g

Baker’s Formula
TOTAL RECIPE
QUANTITY
1,000 g
700 g

BAKER’S
PERCENTAGE
100%
70%

Fine sea salt
Instant dried
yeast
Poolish

20 g

0

1,000 g

0

20 g

0.4 g (scant ⅛ tsp) 0.4 g

 

 

2%

0.04%

50%

Here’s another example of how to play around with hydration: Say you wake up
in the morning and decide you want to make bread in time for dinner that evening.
The Saturday Breads are designed for that schedule. But you want to try using more
water in the dough, say 78 percent hydration instead of 72 percent. So you use 780
grams of water instead of the 720 grams called for in the recipe. Because the dough
will be wetter and more slack, it needs an additional couple of folds to make up for
that. That will give the dough the structural support it needs, helping build up the
gluten network, which is relaxed by the extra water.

CHANGING FLOUR BLENDS

I do this all the time. If you want to work with a specific recipe but adjust the flour
blend, I think you will find it satisfying to know you have the recipe format down
and  can  make  flour  changes  to  suit  your  taste  (or  just  to  use  what  you  have
available). The most important thing is to stick with the same total amount of flour
in the recipe, since amounts of all the other ingredients are based on ratios to the
total flour weight.

Let’s change the flour blend in the Overnight White Bread. The recipe calls for
all white flour, but we can change it to a mix of 70 percent white flour, 20 percent
whole wheat flour, and 10 percent rye flour. (This will make a bread with a similar
blend  to  what  I  used  in  the Field  Blend  recipes)  Change  the  white  flour  to  700
grams, add 200 grams of whole wheat flour and 100 grams of light or dark rye flour
—and if you want, you can add a little more water, say 20 grams. But since the rye
flour is less absorbent than other flours, for now let’s keep the water quantity the
same. The yeast and salt quantities also remain the same.

OVERNIGHT “WHITE” BREAD, NOW WITH WHITE, WHOLE WHEAT, RYE

FLOUR BLEND

INGREDIENT
White flour
Whole wheat flour

QUANTITY
700 g
200 g

BAKER’S PERCENTAGE
70%
20%

Light or dark rye flour, room temperature
Water
Instant dried yeast
Fine sea salt

100 g
780 g, 90ºF to 95ºF (32ºC to 35ºC)
0.8 g (scant ¼ tsp)
22 g

10%
78%
0.08%
2.2%

ADJUSTING THE SCHEDULE

Sometimes you need to adjust timing for the recipe—either because you know in
advance that you need more time before working with the dough at the next stage, or
because  something  unexpected  comes  up  and  you  realize  you  need  to  delay  the
dough. Because bulk fermentation and proofing time are relative to the amount of
leavening and the temperature the dough is held at, you can use those variables to
give  yourself  more  time.  Note  that  I  don’t  advocate  speeding  up  fermentation  or
proofing, as this can adversely affect quality.

Here’s  an  example:  Say  you  want  to  make  one  of  the  Saturday  Breads,  but  an
eight-hour bulk fermentation works better with your schedule than the five hours in
the recipe. In this case, I’d recommend reducing the amount of yeast by about a third
and keeping the temperatures the same. Make notes about what you do and how it
works out, then adjust the amount of yeast accordingly the next time.

Here’s another example, still using the Saturday Breads. Say the day gets on, and
by the time you shape the loaves your evening’s plans have changed and you won’t
be  around  to  bake  the  bread.  Immediately  after  shaping,  put  the  loaves  in  the
refrigerator  (in  their  proofing  baskets  in  nonperforated  plastic  bags).  Then  bake
them the next morning. Alternatively, say you just need to extend the time between
shaping and baking by about an hour. That’s fine; just refrigerate the shaped loaves
about 50 minutes to an hour after they were shaped; they should hold for a couple of
hours. Bake them cold. You won’t need to let them come back to room temperature
before baking.

Here’s another scenario: Perhaps you mixed a final dough at 3 p.m. that would
normally be mature and ready to divide and shape into loaves at 8 p.m., but you
have a meeting from 7 until 9 p.m. As in the previous example, anytime you need to
stretch  out  the  timeline,  simply  refrigerate  the  dough.  Depending  on  the  outside
temperature, you might alternatively put the dough tub or shaped loaves outside—
covered  if  in  the  dough  tub  or  in  plastic  bags  if  shaped  and  in  proofing  baskets.
There  will  always  be  some  guesswork  in  the  timing.  Keep  in  mind  that  it  takes

awhile  for  the  dough  to  chill,  so  it  will  continue  to  evolve  in  the  cooler
temperatures.

When retarding the dough in this way, beware of any temptation to move on to the
next step before the dough is fully evolved. As with adjusting hydration, it’s helpful
to  be  familiar  with  the  recipe  so  you’ll  be  able  to  recognize  when  the  dough  is
optimally  fermented  or  proofed.  With  experience,  you’ll  learn  to  judge  by  its
appearance.

My  overall  guidance  is  that  you  can  elongate  the  process  by  refrigerating  the
dough or holding it at cooler temperatures during bulk fermentation and proofing.
With  practice  you’ll  learn  how  to  do  this  and  still  get  excellent  (sometimes
improved)  results.  Just  be  careful  not  to  use  dough  that  isn’t  fully  fermented  or
proofed when you move on to the next stage, because you’ll sacrifice flavor and
volume in the baked bread.

On the flip side, there are always going to be times when your dough is moving
too  slow—this  is  often  a  problem  in  the  wintertime.  If  you  have  a  dough  that  is
supposed  to  triple  in  size  in  five  hours  but  hasn’t,  or  an  overnight  dough  that
doubled when it should have increased in volume at least two and a half times, find
a warm spot to speed up the dough. The most convenient place I’ve found is in my
oven—with the door ajar and the oven light on, it’s just the right temperature. You
can use the same approach for a poolish or biga that isn’t fully developed. Don’t
remove the lid of your dough tub because that will dry out the dough. But do pay
attention. Warm it up, and you can use your probe thermometer to check the dough
temperature; best to not let it get much above 80 degrees. When the dough does get
warmer it is fun to see how quickly it evolves. This slow dough situation happens
occasionally to every baker. Don’t panic, just use your warm spot!

FLOUR ABSORBENCY

As noted, whole wheat flour absorbs more water than white flour. Therefore,
if you increase the ratio of white flour in a recipe, you’ll need less water to
achieve the same dough consistency. Conversely, if you increase the ration of
whole  wheat  flour,  you’ll  need  to  add  more  water  to  achieve  the  same
consistency. Of course, to make a judgment call on the consistency, it’s best to
be familiar with the recipe using the called-for amounts of ingredients first, so
you’ll have a baseline to compare to. When increasing the amount of water,

it’s  best  to  add  it  in  small  increments,  and  to  weigh  the  water  rather  than
eyeballing  it.  By  volume,  30  or  40  grams  of  water  looks  like  a  very  small
amount, but it can make a big difference.

LEVAIN OPTIONS

This section is mostly for the advanced baker, but you don’t need to be a total bread
geek to use this guidance. I’ll offer two examples here, and from that point you can
extrapolate to other “what if?” scenarios.

Adjusting the Flour Blend in Warm-Spot Levain

First,  let’s  look  at  an  example  of  how  to  use  the  all-white  flour  levain  from  my
White  Flour  Warm-Spot  White  Levain  Bread  recipe  in  other  breads.  This  is  a
lovely levain culture with special flavor characteristics, so you may want to work
with  it  beyond  the  all-white  flour  recipe  in  this  book.  This  is  really  as  easy  as
adjusting flour blends, as described earlier in this essay, using some whole wheat
or rye flour, or maybe spelt or kamut flour, in the final dough mix. Just be sure to
use the same amount of flour in the final dough mix. Instead of using 750 grams of
white flour in the final dough mix, use a new combination of flours that adds up to
750 grams. The example below is for a 40 percent whole wheat version; 40 percent
of 1,000 grams (the total flour in the recipe, including that in the levain) is 400, so
use 400 grams of whole wheat flour and 350 grams of white flour. Likewise, you
could use, for example, 100 grams of rye flour, 200 grams of whole wheat flour,
and 450 grams of white flour to total 750 grams of flour in the final dough mix.

In  the  example  below,  more  water  is  added  to  compensate  for  the  higher
absorbency of the whole wheat flour: 20 grams of water, increasing the hydration
from 78 to 80 percent.

WARM-SPOT LEVAIN, 40 PERCENT WHOLE WHEAT

Final Dough

INGREDIENT

White flour
Whole wheat

FINAL DOUGH MIX
QUANTITY
350 g
400 g

QUANTITY IN
LEVAIN
250 g
0

Baker’s Formula
TOTAL RECIPE
QUANTITY
600 g
400 g

BAKER’S
PERCENTAGE
60%
40%

flour
Water
Fine sea salt
Instant dried
yeast
Levain

625 g, 80ºF (27ºC)
20 g

1 g (¼ tsp)

425 g

175 g
0

0

 

800 g
20 g

1 g

 

80%
2%

0.1%

25%*

* The baker’s percentage for levain is the amount of flour in the levain expressed

as a percentage of the total flour in the recipe.

You  may  have  noticed  that  the White  Flour  Warm-Spot  Levain  Bread  recipe
contains  25  percent  of  the  recipe’s  flour  in  the  levain  culture  and  uses  only  0.1
percent yeast, whereas the hybrid leavening recipes in this book have 20 percent
levain and 0.2 percent yeast, and the pure levains have 12 percent levain and no
added yeast. I wanted more levain in this recipe to emphasize the specific character
of this style of levain. With more levain, I needed less instant yeast. You could take
it further and eliminate the baker’s yeast altogether, and just give the dough a little
longer to rise.

Liquid Levain

Liquid levain is a term any good professional baker knows. As commonly used, it
implies  a  levain  culture  with  equal  weights  of  water  and  flour  and  typically  all
white  flour.  Liquid  levain  imparts  its  own  specific  character  to  the  bread:  I
associate it with lactic flavors, which tend to be milky or buttery. If particularly
ripe, it might develop a slight overripe fruit taste—this is caused by the volatile
esters that form from the combination of alcohol (from extended yeast fermentation)
and acids (from bacterial fermentation).

To  create  a  liquid  levain,  use  this  book’s  base  levain  culture,  as  described  in
chapter  8.  Then,  the  day  before  mixing  your  final  dough,  follow  the  instructions
below to transition your levain to a liquid culture. Anytime you change from your
base  levain  culture,  the  longer  you  maintain  the  new  conditions  and  feeding
protocol,  the  more  it  will  take  on  a  new  flavor  profile,  as  the  wild  yeast  and
bacteria and their acids thrive in the new environment.

As  you’ll  see,  the  Day  1  feeding  is  at  100  percent  hydration,  rather  than  80
percent as in the base levain. It also uses only a bit of the mature base levain for the
first feeding.

SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Day 1, starting with the base levain from chapter 8, feed the new
levain at 9 a.m. and again at 6 p.m. Day 2: feed the new levain at 9 a.m., mix
the final dough at 3 p.m., shape into loaves at 8 p.m., proof the loaves in the
refrigerator overnight, and bake the next morning.

LIQUID LEVAIN

DAY 1

First Levain Feeding
INGREDIENT
Mature, active levain
White flour
Water

DAY 2

QUANTITY
50 g
250 g
250 g, 95ºF (35ºC) Water

INGREDIENT
Levain from the first feeding
White flour

Second Levain Feeding
QUANTITY
250 g
250 g
250 g, 85ºF (29ºC)

Third Levain Feeding
INGREDIENT
Levain from the second feeding
White flour
Water

QUANTITY
100 g
500 g
500 g, 85ºF to 90ºF (29ºC to 32ºC)

A good recipe for experimenting with a liquid levain is the Pain de Campagne.
Substitute your new liquid levain for the standard base levain and use the amounts
of ingredients indicated below. Since there’s more water in the liquid levain than
the book’s base levain, there’s less water in the ingredients for the final dough than
in the original recipe. However, the total hydration remains the same, at 78 percent.
The  amount  of  water  in  the  final  dough  mix  is  simply  decreased  by  40  grams  to
compensate  for  the  additional  40  grams  of  water  in  the  levain  added  to  the  final
dough mix.

PAIN DE CAMPAGNE WITH LIQUID LEVAIN

Final Dough

INGREDIENT

White flour
Whole wheat
flour

FINAL DOUGH MIX
QUANTITY
700 g

QUANTITY IN
LEVAIN
200 g

Baker’s Formula
TOTAL RECIPE
QUANTITY
900 g

100 g

0

100 g

580 g, 90ºF to 95ºF (32ºC to

BAKER’S
PERCENTAGE
90%

10%

Water
Fine sea salt
Instant dried
yeast
Levain

35ºC)
21 g

2 g (½ tsp)

400 g

200 g
0

0

 

780 g
21 g

2 g

 

78%
2.1%

0.2%

20%

RECIPE SHORTHAND

Any time I make an adjustment to a recipe, I record it, even if only temporarily, so I
can track what I’ve done and not depend on my fallible memory to recall if I put, for
example, 560 grams or 540 grams of flour in the final dough mix eight hours ago. I
keep  a  pocket-size  notebook  in  my  kitchen  for  just  this  purpose  and  I  use  recipe
shorthand. I thought I’d share my system with you, and this seems like a good place,
because  whenever  you  tweak  a  recipe,  you  should  record  what  you  did  for
reference in process, as well as for later if you want to keep track of what works
and what doesn’t.

Here’s my recipe shorthand for Overnight Pizza Dough with Poolish:

– Poolish: 500g flour, 500g water 80°F, 0.4g yeast. 12–14 hrs at room

temp 70°F.
– No autolyse.
– Final dough: 500g flour, 250g water 105°F, 20g salt, poolish. 2 folds.
5–6 hrs to 2½x volume. Divide into 5 (350g each) and shape into balls.
30–60 mins at room temp, then into fridge.

Then I take notes in process like this:

– Poolish mix 7 p.m.
– Dough mix, water only 95°F, 9 a.m. end mix temp 73°F. Use warmer

water next time.

– 2 folds.
– Dough at about 2½x at 3 p.m. Dough balls into fridge at 3:30 p.m.

Here is my recipe shorthand for Field Blend #1:

– Levain: Feed first thing in the morning. Use 100g mature levain, 400g
white, 100g whole wheat, 400g water, 85°F to 90°F. 6 hours at room
temp. before final dough mix.

– Autolyse: 590g white, 60g whole wheat, 150g white rye, 590g water,

90°F to 95°F. Rest 20–30 mins.

– Final dough mix: Add 360g levain, 21g salt, 2g yeast. 3 or 4 folds. 5 hrs

to 2½x. Divide, shape, wrap, and into fridge 12 hours.

– Bake 475°F, 30 mins lid on, 20 mins lid off.

My in-process notes might look something like this:

– Levain mix, 8 a.m.
– Autolyse with 90°F water. Final mix temp 80°F. Use cooler water next

time. End mix 2 p.m.

– 4 folds.
– Divide, shape, into fridge at 7 p.m.
– Bake 9 a.m. Good result. Yay!

PART 4
PIZZA RECIPES

CHAPTER 12
PIZZA AND FOCACCIA METHOD

T

hree and a half years after opening Ken’s Artisan Bakery I wanted to work with my
staff on a new project, seeing if we could make good pizza in our massive gas-fired
bread oven, baking the pies directly on the oven hearth. Pizza is, after all, a kind of
bread, so it seemed a natural extension of what we were already good at.
Initial trials went well enough that we decided try it out on the public as a one-night-
per-week fun-fest, branding it Monday Night Pizza. At the time, in 2005, Portland was
embracing  alternatives  to  the  usual  dining  scene,  and  creative,  nontraditional  ventures
like  Ripe’s  underground  restaurant,  Family  Supper,  and  summertime  white-tablecloth
dinners in farmers’ fields produced by Plate & Pitchfork put a kind of Portland-specific,
rule-bending fun back into going out for dinner. Turning my bakery into a restaurant one
night a week was an evolutionary step from the earlier experiment when we operated as
a mini-bistro, and it was a way to take advantage of the talents of some of the people
working at the bakery at that time.

The bakery made the Oregonian’s top one hundred restaurants that year on the merits
of our one-night-per-week pop-up pizza place, and from the first Monday night people
were waiting up to an hour for a table, pressed up against the pastry cases and hanging
out on the sidewalk with a glass of wine or a beer in hand—the power of pizza! The
momentum  of  Monday  Night  Pizza  birthed Ken’s  Artisan  Pizza,  a  wood-fired  oven
pizzeria  in  Southeast  Portland  that  I  opened  with  our  chef, Alan  Maniscalco,  in  2006.
Alan had worked at the bakery for four years, for a while managing the bread and pastry
teams,  and  he  also  ran  the  Monday  Night  Pizza  kitchen  before  helping  me  open  the
pizzeria.

At Ken’s Artisan Pizza we bake pies inspired by the Neapolitan pizzas that Alan and I
had each enjoyed during various trips to Italy. Ours are individual pies, about 12 inches
in  diameter,  with  a  very  thin  crust.  Our  cooks  toss  the  dough  in  the  air  in  a  spiraling
fashion  to  get  a  perfect  distribution  of  thin  dough  rather  than  for  effect,  but  the  flying
disks make great theater too.

The  toppings  are  on  the  minimal  side,  as  the  intention  is  for  the  crust,  sauce,  and
toppings to be in balance. We also aim for a slight char on the bottom and perimeter of
the crust. A slight char. It isn’t easy. Things happen fast at 750°F (399°C). The whole-

milk mozzarella we use is completely melted, a milky ooze with just a touch of brown on
top. The tips of the fresh basil leaves that bake on top of the pizza are just a little crisp.

The oven has a big pile of red embers in the back, and you can see its large, dancing
flame  from  the  street.  We  keep  thinly  split  pieces  of  oak,  madrone,  and  occasionally
other hardwoods in a cutout at the base of the oven and constantly feed the oven’s fire
through each evening’s service. In the morning, there’s still plenty of heat left for baking
croutons and other items before lighting a new flame at noon. The restaurant oven has
fire burning in it at least ten hours each day, every day of the week.

This oven, a brick le Panyol model, was built by Timothy Seaton, a third-generation
mason who specializes in building wood-burning appliances and serves as chair of the
Masonry  Heater  Caucus  for  the  Hearth,  Patio  and  Barbecue  Association,  as  well  as
secretary  for  an  international  standards  organization  for  wood-burning  appliances.
Timothy  knows  his  stuff,  and  he’s  a  fine  craftsman.  The  interior  hearth  of  the  oven  is
nearly six feet in diameter and was built with plenty of mass to hold and radiate intense
heat  back  onto  the  baking  surface.  In  the  morning  the  oven  is  still  well  over  500°F
(260°C)—too hot to bake bread. Yet the temperature of the outside of the oven never
exceeds  110°F  (43°C).  It’s  an  impressive  beast:  a  white,  igloo-shaped  inferno  in  the
middle of the restaurant.

When pizzas bake, they are usually placed in the oven with their backs 1½ to 2 feet
from the fire. At this point, the temperature is about 750°F (399°C) near the back of the
pizza—it’s  over  1,000°F  (538°C)  where  the  fire  is.  There  is  nearly  a  100°F  (56°C)
difference in the temperature of the hearth surface between the front and the back of the
pie. Each pizza is rotated as it bakes—and comes out of the oven in about two and a half
minutes. The pie is best when the bottom, the top, and the rim of the crust all reach their
perfect  finished  point  at  exactly  the  same  time.  This  wood-fired  oven  is  ideal  for
achieving that type of bake.

How does all of this translate to something you can bake at home? What do I know?
First, you can make a great dough. The flavor of the crust will be there. Second, you can
use  the  best-quality  ingredients  that  are  not  overly  expensive. A  can  of  San  Marzano
tomatoes might be a little pricey, but the cost is less than what you’d pay for an average
retail pizza made from mass-market tomatoes, and one 28-ounce can makes enough sauce
for five pizzas. Add whole-milk mozzarella packed in brine, a stick of good salami, and
fresh basil. And you should already have good olive oil around, along with garlic and
chile  flakes.  If  you  can  get  your  hands  on  good-quality  dried  oregano,  that  would  be
great, but if not, don’t stress.

A NOTE ON DOUGH HYDRATION

The pizza dough recipes that follow have a hydration of 70 to 75 percent, whereas
most  traditional  pizza  dough  recipes  have  a  hydration  closer  to  65  percent.  The
dough recipes in this book are specifically designed for baking on a pizza stone or
on a stone hearth.

For focaccia (which is not baked directly on a hearth, but rather laid out in a pan)
you can use wetter doughs than you would for pizza, such as my White Bread with
80% Biga dough. Since you spread a foccacia dough out in a skillet or on an oiled
pan, you can use a slacker dough. By contrast, if you’re baking pizza on a stone, you
need dough with enough structural character that it can be shaped into a thin disk,

dressed with toppings, and then slid onto the preheated baking surface. The wetter
the dough, the softer and stickier it will be, making it more difficult to handle at
every step except mixing; holes might form during shaping or when sliding the pizza
into the oven, and the crust might rupture on the stone if you try to turn it or slide it
out before the bottom is fully set.

However,  I  prefer  doughs  with  higher  hydration,  even  though  they’re  sticky  and
trickier to work with, because they allow for the full character of fermentation I’m
looking for. They also give more poofiness in the rim, provided the fermentation is
complete,  and  have  a  more  delicate  texture.  Delicate  texture  also  comes  from
proper high-heat baking and using soft 00 flour or all-purpose flour. The three pizza
doughs in this book made with 70 percent hydration are a good middle ground. The
recipe for poolish pizza dough, at 75 percent hydration, pushes the boundary and
requires a little more finesse. Three key techniques will help deliver success with
these  higher-hydration,  soft  pizza  doughs.  First,  folding  the  dough  after  mixing  it
adds  needed  strength.  Second,  making  pizza  from  cold  dough,  straight  from  the
refrigerator, adds further strength. Third, because these doughs are a bit sticky, you
need to toss each dough ball, top and bottom, in flour before you begin to shape it
so it doesn’t stick to your hands. Most people know not to fold raw flour into bread
dough during shaping, but the same is not true for pizza dough—in this case, flour is
your friend. If you have difficulty working with these doughs, it’s okay to decrease
the amount of water in the dough by 2 or 3 percent. Note, however, that this will
make it more difficult to mix the dough by hand, so you may need to use a mixer
instead, and you should be sure to hydrate the yeast first.

PIZZA DOUGH OVERVIEW

Chapter 13 has four recipes for pizza dough, each making enough dough for five pizzas
about  12  inches  in  diameter.  All  make  a  fine  pizza,  and  the  different  recipes  offer
different schedule options, from a same-day straight dough to overnight doughs using a
poolish  or  levain. Chapter  14  has  recipes  for  two  types  of  red  sauce  (smooth  and
chunky), tomato fillets, and then a variety of topped pizzas and focaccia. I recommend
you start by making Pizza Margherita  or The New Yorker , and from that point, you can
have  fun  making  pizzas  with  a  variety  of  toppings.  Pick  your  dough  recipe,  pick  your
sauce recipe, choose your cheese and toppings, and bake your pizza. Plenty of guidance
follows here and within the recipes.

The  recipes  for  pizzas  and  focaccia  in chapter 14  are  organized  by  baking method.
Here’s a quick overview  so  you’ll  know  what  options  you’ll  have.  First, starting,  are
recipes for baking pizza on a preheated pizza stone; that’s the technique you’ll need to
use if you want to make a dazzling Neapolitan or New York–style pizza. Then, starting
with Iron Skillet Meat Pie, you’ll find recipes for making deep-dish-style pizza in a cast-
iron skillet. This is the ideal if you don’t have a pizza stone or simply want to make a
homier pizza that involves a little less work (think late night or just home from a long day
at work—you want something good but don’t want to put a lot of work into it, and there
are  a  couple  dough  balls  in  the  fridge  ready  to  go).  Finally,  starting  on Focaccia
Genovese, you’ll find recipes for making focaccia in a skillet or on a baking sheet.

As indicated in the recipe yields in chapters 5, 6, and 9, some of the bread doughs can
be used to make focaccia or pizza. Using a cast-iron skillet or a baking sheet is best for
many  of  these  doughs.  You  can  make  traditional  focaccia  from  the  pizza  doughs  in
chapter 13, or a less-traditional focaccia from any bread dough recipe in this book, even
if that isn’t indicated in the recipe. Depending on the dough you use, the texture of the
focaccia will vary, from lighter, with the poolish, biga, and Saturday Bread recipes, to
heartier from the levain bread recipes. Each has its own character. Try not to feel too
bound by rules. Use what you have on hand and common sense when pairing dough with
toppings.

Italian 00 flour Pronounced “double-oh” in the United States, this
flour  comes  from  near  Naples,  Italy,  and  is  the  standard  for
Neapolitan  pizza.  It  has  a  soft  quality  that  you  can  feel  as  you
handle  the  dough.  It  makes  dough  that  is  delicate  but  still  has  the
tensile strength to form into a pizza, and bakes into a delicious and
tender pizza crust.

PIZZA DOUGH METHOD

The pizza doughs in this book use the same method as the bread doughs, so you can use
the same basic techniques for autolysing, mixing, and folding, as detailed in chapter 4.
I’ll  discuss  the  remaining  steps  in  detail  here  to  give  you  a  fuller  description  of  the
process than is possible in the recipes themselves.

Dividing the Dough

Moderately flour a work surface; you’ll need an area about 2 feet wide. With floured
hands, carefully ease the dough from the tub onto the floured area. To do this, sprinkle
some flour around the edges of the dough tub, tip it slightly, and gently loosen the bottom
of the dough if any is sticking to the tub. Don’t just pull the dough out; help it out of the
tub. After  picking  it  up  and  easing  it  back  onto  the  work  surface  in  a  somewhat  even
shape, sprinkle a dusting of flour over the entire top surface of the dough. Then use a
dough knife or plastic dough scraper to divide it into five equal-size pieces. You can
eyeball it or use a scale. Each piece should weigh about 350 grams. It’s best not to add
in more than two pieces, or the dough will be hard to shape unless you give it a very long
rest  period.  If  you  need  to  add  a  piece  of  dough  to  bring  up  the  weight,  fold  the
additional dough into the middle as you shape the dough into a ball, as described in the
next step.

Shaping the Dough Balls

You can use the same method for shaping as used to shape bread dough into rounds, as
described in “Step 5: Shape the Loaves”. Take care not to degas the dough in this step—
there’s flavor in that gas! Here’s a refresher:

1. Stretch one-quarter of the dough at a time up and over the top, pulling each segment
out until you get to its maximum stretch, then folding it over the top to the opposite
side.

2. Repeat, working your way around the dough and forming it into a round until it

holds its shape. Then flip it over and put the seam on the work surface in an area
cleared of flour (the clean surface will provide more friction, or grip, so you can
add tension to the dough ball in the next step).

3. Cup your hands around the back of the dough ball as you face it. Pull the entire

dough ball 6 or 8 inches toward you on the dry, unfloured surface, leading with your
pinkies and applying enough pressure so the dough ball grips your work surface and
doesn’t just slide across it. As you pull, this will tighten up the ball and add tension
to it.

4. Give the dough a quarter turn and repeat this tightening step. Proceed in this way
until you’ve gone all the way around the dough ball two or three times. The dough
doesn’t need to be super tight, but you don’t want it to be loose either. The dough
ball will need time to relax before it can be shaped into pizza. If you are on a short
timeline and will be tossing your pie sooner rather than later, shape the dough balls
a little looser, with less tension.

5. Repeat the process with the remaining pieces of dough.

If you used the soft white 00 flour, as you shape it you’ll notice how soft and pliable

the dough feels. It’s a beautiful thing.

Proofing the Dough Balls

Lightly dust a rimmed baking sheet or a couple of dinner plates with flour. Put the dough
balls  on  the  pan  or  plates  with  some  space  between  them  to  accommodate  their
expansion. Use your hand to lightly oil the tops of the dough balls, or simply dust the tops
with flour. Cover with plastic wrap and let sit at room temperature for 30 to 60 minutes
(or longer for focaccia, as described below), then put into the refrigerator to chill out. I
like  to  let  them  sit  for  at  least  30  minutes  in  the  refrigerator  before  turning  them  into
pizza, because I find it easier to shape cold dough without tearing it.

Any leftover dough balls can be kept in the refrigerator a night or two. You may even

find that you prefer the next-day dough, as it develops flavor in the refrigerator.

When I’m making focaccia, I sometimes like to let it develop more than I would if I
were using it for bread or pizza. With bread dough, structural needs drive the process.
After  it’s  been  shaped,  you  bake  just  before  the  loaves  are  overproofed  (the  proteins
break  down  and  stop  holding  on  to  the  fermentation  gases,  causing  the  dough  to
collapse). This isn’t a problem with focaccia, where you aren’t looking for maximum
expansion. In fact, overproofing allows the focaccia dough to spread out into shape more
easily and hold the finger dents where you want them, while still poofing up around the
rim enough to achieve the form I’m looking for. And as you might guess, I like the way
the  flavors  evolve  when  the  dough  overproofs,  developing  a  slightly  more  fermented
flavor. So, for focaccia, oil the tops of the freshly shaped dough balls, then cover with
plastic wrap and let them sit out at room temperature for 2 hours. Then you can either
chill them for later use or make focaccia right away.

A NOTE ON PIZZA DOUGH YIELDS

You might wonder why or whether you should make enough pizza dough to produce
five dough balls if you only want to make one or two pizzas. You can halve these
recipes and get the same results. You can also quintuple them! The ingredient ratios
remain the same regardless of batch size, but bigger batches are easier to mix in a
mixer than by hand.

I like having an extra dough ball or two on hand in case one breaks or tangles while
I’m  shaping  it  or  in  case  it  doesn’t  load  into  the  oven  well.  One  time  my  dog
grabbed a pizza just as I was about to put it in the oven, and a hilarious game of tug-
of-war  ensued.  (Why  did  I  set  the  peel  with  a  fully  prepped  pizza  on  the  coffee
table at dog height?) If I end up with extra dough, I might use it to make a simple
focaccia topped with marinara or olive oil, salt, and pepper, which can be eaten
fresh or wrapped up and saved for the next day.

LET’S TALK SAUCE

Okay, you have your dough balls made up. Now it’s time for sauce. What makes a great
pizza sauce? The tomatoes. Most store-bought canned tomatoes have too much acidity to
make a great pizza sauce, which is why many recipes for pizza sauce include some sugar.
When cooked, maybe these tomatoes can make a nice pasta sauce, but we don’t cook the
tomato sauce for pizza. Rather, it cooks on the pie while it’s baking, which allows the
sauce to retain a freshness of flavor.

The solution is simple: buy canned San Marzano tomatoes from Italy. These tomatoes
are amazing and make the difference between an okay pizza sauce and an excellent one.
San  Marzano  tomatoes  are  grown  and  canned  near  Naples,  and  they  are  the  only
tomatoes allowed on a true Neapolitan pizza. They have a rich, naturally sweet flavor; a
high amount of pulp, so they aren’t watery; and very low acidity.

You  should  be  able  to  find  canned  San  Marzano  tomatoes  at  well-stocked
supermarkets. If they aren’t available in your area, use the best canned plum tomatoes
you can find. Alternatively, you can buy them online for just a few dollars per 28-ounce
can—a lot cheaper than what you’d pay for a large pizza. Go ahead and buy a case of
twelve cans; that way you’ll be set for quite a while.

I recommend buying whole San Marzano tomatoes. When you’re ready to make sauce,
let the tomatoes drain in a colander for about 10 minutes. After draining, what remains is
just the whole tomatoes and a thick pulpy residue that you can use to make your pizza
sauce. You can capture the juice in a large bowl set underneath the colander and reserve
it for another use; for example, I combine the juice with vinegar and spices and use it to
marinate chicken or to make Spanish rice.

At this point you can go simple, just adding salt and maybe some olive oil and then
pureeing the tomatoes in a blender. I like to add chopped garlic and some chile flakes for
a little zip, along with good-quality dried oregano to give the sauce that East Coast pizza
flavor I remember from my childhood. (I use oregano on some of my white pizzas too.)
Dried  oregano  is  used  in  the  Campania  region  of  Italy  and  its  capital,  Naples,  and
throughout  southern  Italy  and  Sicily.  I  recommend  Calabrian  oregano,  which  you  can
purchase online. However, it’s fine to use any good-quality dried oregano that has a nice
wild  pungency  to  it—or  use  none  at  all.  The  recipes  here  are  my  ideals,  and  suit  my
taste. At a minimum you can make a fine pizza sauce with just good tomatoes and a little
bit of salt.

A Chicago-style pizza sauce, heaped on generously to match the thickness of the crust,
is  chunky,  not  pureed.  Since  I  eat  a  lot  of  pizza,  I  like  to  mix  it  up,  using  chunky  or
smooth sauce according to whim and regardless of crust thickness.

PIZZA STONE BAKING

As I developed the pizza and focaccia recipes for this book, I was initially challenged,
as others before me, in figuring out how to get the best results using a standard home
oven with a pizza stone. I landed on the technique of placing the pizza stone in the upper
third of the oven and using a combination of baking and broiling. I was fascinated by
how good the pizza baked. I hope you get similar results.

Oven Management and Preheating

Set your pizza stone on a rack in the upper portion of the oven so the surface is about 8
inches below the broiler. Preheat the oven to the highest heat setting possible; most home
ovens only go up to 500°F or 525°F (260°C or 274°C). If you have a pizza oven that
goes higher, I recommend making your first pizzas at 600°F (316°C). Save the super-
high-temperature baking until after you’ve done this a few times. Also, keep in mind that
every oven bakes differently, so pay attention and get the best using what you have.

Once the oven has reached the target temperature, continue heating the pizza stone for
20 to 30 minutes, switching to the broil setting for the last 5 or so minutes. This ensures
that the pizza stone will be thoroughly saturated with heat before baking. Then turn the
setting back to bake, put your pizza in the oven, and bake for 5 minutes at about 525°F
(274°C). Change the setting back to broil and then give your pizza about 2 more minutes;
the broiler should finish the top of your pie. This technique should produce an excellent
thin-crust pizza with a bit of char on the rim and good browning on the bottom of the
crust. Keep a pair of tongs handy to pull the pizza from the pizza stone and onto a plate.
(If you don’t have tongs, use the tines of a fork to pierce the crust and pull the pizza onto
the plate.)

I should note that the first time I experimented with using my home oven this way, it
freaked  out—flashing  an  error  code  and  beeping  until  I  threw  the  electrical  panel’s
breaker (unmarked, naturally). I didn’t kill—or even injure—the oven, happily. On my
second try I went with just 3 minutes on broil before returning to bake mode, and Mr.
Oven was okay with that. I mention this because every home pizza baker needs to find a
way to tweak their oven to get the highest possible heat without damaging it. I’m sure
what happened with my oven was the result of an internal safeguard that shut it off when
the temperature reached higher than the highest bake setting.

The point is to use the highest baking temperature your oven allows, and to place the
pizza stone about 8 inches below the broiler coil. Switching to broil for a few minutes
before baking (if your oven can handle it!), helps to superheat the pizza stone just before
you  load your pie in the oven; this will give you that crisp bottom crust with a bit of
color to it, even to the point of being pocked with small black spots like we get from the
wood-fired oven at my pizzeria. The reason I call for broiling again at the end of the
pizza’s baking time is to finish the top of the pizza with very high heat to simulate, as

best as possible, a high-temperature commercial pizza oven. Home oven broilers heat up
at different speeds, but when they do fire they produce very high heat. Therefore, your
pizza can go from perfect to burned pretty quickly, so pay very close attention to this
final step of baking. Don’t be afraid of getting a touch of char on the rim of the crust,
though. It adds visual drama and a crunchy, slightly bitter taste contrast that I totally love.
When  you  bake  your  pie,  aim  for  temperature  settings  and  oven  position  that  will
allow  the  toppings,  the  bottom  of  the  crust,  and  the  rim  of  the  crust  to  all  reach  their
perfect point simultaneously. This takes a few tries and it’s worth it.

Setting Up Your Pizza Station

While the oven is preheating, set up a pizza assembly station. Have the pizza sauce with
a  large  spoon  next  to  where  you’ll  toss  or  shape  your  dough,  along  with  extra-virgin
olive  oil  and  your  other  prepared  toppings,  such  as  cut  up  cheese,  salami,  and  basil
leaves. Give yourself about 2 feet of width on the countertop to work with the dough, and
leave space for the pizza peel right next to you.

There are many ways to handle the dough to make a pizza. Thin crust is typical of a
Neapolitan pizza, and while it takes practice, I can offer a few tips to make it work the
first time too.

As mentioned, these pizza doughs are very soft, so it’s best to start with cold dough,
just removed from the refrigerator, when shaping pizzas. This makes it less likely that the
dough will rip or be troublesome, and also results in a bit more oven spring for a poofy
rim.

Set your pizza peel on the work surface next to where you are working your dough. A
wood peel is definitely best. Lightly dust the peel with the same flour you used to make
your pizza dough. Don’t use cornmeal or other coarse grains.

When  working  with  the  pizza  doughs  in  this  book,  flour  is  your  friend.  Generously
flour your work surface. Then put a dough ball on the work surface and pat it down onto
the flour. Then turn it over and repeat on the other side. Leaving about 1 inch of the outer
rim undeflated, punch down the middle, then flip the dough over and repeat.

Using  both  hands,  grab  the  rim  and  lift  so  the  crust  hangs  down  vertically,  still
preserving the outer rim by placing your thumbs about an inch from the perimeter. Let
gravity pull the rest of the dough down to stretch it. Run the rim between your hands,
working all the way around the circumference of the dough several times. If the dough
gets sticky, give both top and bottom another dusting of flour. The easiest way to do this
is to keep a floured area on your work surface and just plop the dough down on the flour,
then turn it over to dust the other side.

Next, make two fists and position them just inside the rim, with the crust still hanging
vertically.  Gently  stretch  and  turn  the  dough  repeatedly,  still  letting  the  bottom  of  the

dough pull down, expanding the surface. Keep a close eye on the thickness of the dough.
You want it thin, but you don’t want it to tear or develop holes. If you end up with a
small tear, don’t panic—it’s okay to patch it.

Spread the dough onto the lightly floured peel and run your hands around the perimeter
to shape it into a round and work out the kinks. Before topping the pie, give the peel a
test shake to make sure the dough slides without sticking.

Once  you’ve  shaped  the  dough,  spread  your  sauce  over  it,  not  too  thickly,  using  a
small ladle or a large serving spoon, and smoothing and spreading the sauce with the
back of the spoon. Scatter the toppings over the top, using only moderate amounts so you
don’t add more weight than the dough can handle. Before sliding the pie into the oven, do
another test to confirm that the pizza will slide off the peel—just give the peel a quick
shake. If any part of the dough sticks, first try working it out with a few more quick back-
and-forth shakes. If that doesn’t do the trick, you’ll need to gently lift the dough up and
toss a bit of flour underneath. Yes, this is difficult, but it’s better to find out in advance
and deal with it. The first time or two you try this, have an extra ball of dough on hand.
Add only minimal toppings to the first pizza and view it as a test pie, so you can get the
feel of the peel and how to transfer the pie to the pizza stone, and see what happens after
you put it in the oven.

Baking

Once the pizza stone is fully preheated, gently slide the topped pizza onto it. Once you’ve
positioned the pizza, still on the peel, over the baking stone, ease the peel back with a
stuttered series of wristy flicks. Once you’ve done it a bunch of times, you’ll have a feel
for it and can do it more confidently in a single motion. Be relaxed and it will be fine.

The ideal bake includes mozzarella that’s fully melted and slightly browned in spots, a
poofy rim with plenty of color, and a crust that’s both blond and brown on the bottom,
with  a  few  small  black  spots  (it’s  okay  to  lift  one  edge  and  take  a  peek). At  525°F

(274°C), this should take 7 to 8 minutes altogether, including those last 2 to 3 minutes of
broiling, but keep a close eye on it. At 600°F (316°C) it should take just 4 to 5 minutes
altogether, and you may not need to use the broiler to get the best finish on the top. Every
oven is different; just know you have the broiler as an option for finishing the pie. At my
pizzeria, we bake the pizzas for 2½ to 3 minutes in a wood-fired oven, in the section of
the oven that’s around 700°F to 750°F (371°C to 399°C). Use your eyes, your nose, and
your good judgment.

The  baking  temperature  has  a  specific  effect  on  the  pizza.  When  baking  at  500°F
(274°C) for a longer time, you’ll get a crisper crust and pizza with less moisture. The
hotter the oven and the shorter the baking time, the softer and more moist the pizza. When
baked at 700°F (371°C), the result is closer to the real Neapolitan pies, which are baked
in a (roughly) 900°F (482°C) oven for just about 90 seconds, and have a lot of moisture
in them. This ends up being a matter of taste, and of getting the best from whatever setup
you have.

Use tongs or a fork to pull the pizza off the stone and onto a plate, then slide the pizza
onto a wood surface so you can cut it. At this stage, I like to drizzle a bit (sometimes a
lot  if  it’s  fresh  pressed)  of  best-quality  extra-virgin  olive  oil  over  the  top.  Enjoy  the
aromas while you slice the pizza, then serve it immediately, with olive oil, chile flakes,
and sea salt at the table as garnishes. Some Italian traditionalists prefer to serve the pizza
unsliced.  That’s  fine  too,  but  cutting  through  fresh  baked  dough  on  a  ceramic  plate  is
more than I want to hassle with. I like to pick up the pieces.

PIZZA BAKING SUMMARY

– Preheat the oven to 525ºF for 30 minutes with the pizza stone inside.
– Set up your pizza station.
– Shape and top your pizza.
– Change the oven setting to broil for about 5 minutes.
– Switch the oven back to bake at 525ºF.
– Load the pizza into the oven; bake for 5 minutes.
– Switch oven to broil and bake for 2 to 3 more minutes, keeping a close eye on

it, until the pizza is done.

– Use tongs to pull the pizza from the stone to a plate.
– Enjoy!

THE PIZZA TOSS

The  pizza tossing thing—it isn’t required, but it is fun. It has a point to it. And it
takes plenty of repetition before you get it. If you have a sacrificial dough ball each
time  you  make  pizza,  try  tossing  it.  If  you’re  right-handed,  stretch  the  dough  as
described, on your fists, and once it’s partly stretched out, use your right fist to spin
the dough into the air. If you’re left-handed, use your left fist to initiate the spin. The
motion here is akin to what your hands go through when you turn the steering wheel
in  your  car  to  the  left.  Catch  the  dough  on  your  fists,  then  call  it  good  and  set  it
down on the peel—or, repeat the toss if you think the dough can handle it without
breaking. I usually toss a dough ball two or three times before setting it down to get
an even distribution of thin dough throughout. If you keep at it, each time you make
five dough balls with my recipe, try tossing one or two. I bet by the fourth or fifth
time you try this, you’ll start to get the hang of it. Don’t stress; just have fun with it.
The point is to achieve a uniform thickness—or, rather, thinness. And to show off to
your friends as you sing “ ’O Sole Mio.” If achieving the thinnest of crusts is your
goal, this is the way to do it. It does take practice. This is one benefit to having
extra dough on hand. If you have a ball of dough to spare, try tossing it. If it doesn’t
work out, you can still shape another piece.

IRON-SKILLET PIZZA

If you don’t have a pizza stone, you can bake pizza in a cast-iron skillet. This is also
easier than setting up a pizza peel, dusting it with flour, applying the sauce and toppings,
and hoping to scooch the uncooked pizza onto the preheated pizza stone. Any of the pizza
doughs in this book will work for the crust. Use a 340- or 350-gram dough ball for a
thick  crust,  or  a  200-gram  dough  ball  for  a  thin  crust.  If  you  like  a  lot  of  sauce  and
toppings, go for the thick crust, and if you’re aiming for a Chicago deep-dish style pizza,
use a chunky sauce. (You can also use the iron-skillet method to make a basic focaccia—
either thick or thin—by topping the dough simply; for example, with just olive oil and
seasonings. This is great as a fresh bread with dinner.)

One of the most important keys for success is that the dough be completely relaxed,
with very little tension. If you prepare the Same-Day Straight Pizza Dough in the morning

for pizza that evening, be sure not to shape the dough balls too tightly, and give the dough
balls  at  least  an  hour  to  relax  before  forming  the  pizza. Also  note  that  cold  dough  is
easier to shape than dough at room temperature.

About 20 minutes before you want to bake the pizza, position a rack near the bottom of
the  oven,  then  preheat  the  oven  to  525°F  (274°C).  If  your  oven  only  goes  to  500°F
(260°C), that’s fine; the pizza will just take a bit longer to bake. When you’re ready to
shape the crust, remove the dough ball from the refrigerator. Holding the rim, stretch the
dough to a circle about 9 inches in diameter, then put it in a dry, room temperature 9-inch
cast-iron skillet.

Because the skillet isn’t preheated, the pizza will take quite a bit longer to bake than it
would on a baking stone; the typical baking time is 15 to 20 minutes. The texture will be
different too—this crust will be firmer and generally without floppiness in the middle.

WHAT’S THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN PIZZA AND
FOCACCIA?

I bet there are as many opinions on this topic as there are pizzerias in New York. Some
definitions  focus  on  dough  thickness,  others  on  whether  it’s  cooked  in  a  pan,  and  yet
others on whether its topped with cheese. At a focacceria tipica ligure in Italy, I had
focaccia with a crust about ¼ inch thick and topped with tomato sauce and cheese. To
me it looked and tasted like pizza. And while some people think of focaccia as being
thick, pizza crusts can certainly be thick; pizzas can also be made without cheese and, at
least in the United States, you’ll find plenty of pizzas baked in pans.

In this book, the focaccias are baked either in a cast-iron skillet or on a sheet pan,
whereas the pizzas are (preferably) baked directly on a pizza stone. Except I’m going to
cheat and put cast-iron skillet pizza recipes in this book, so if it has cheese I’m calling it
“pizza,” even if it’s baked in a skillet. In terms of ease of execution, pan baking is much
simpler than baking on a pizza stone. Spreading the dough out on a pan or in a skillet,
covering it with toppings, and putting the pan in the oven may seem less intimidating than

pizza baking: tossing the dough, dressing it on the peel, and getting it to slide off easily
onto the pizza stone in the oven.

As far as the thickness of focaccia is concerned, I leave it up to you. If you use 200
grams of dough in a 9-inch skillet, the result will be focaccia with thin crust; if you use
350 grams of dough in the same skillet, the result will be a thick crust. Focaccia is great
for the variety of toppings you can put on it, which are limited only by your imagination,
and for it’s versatility. You can serve it alongside a salad and make a meal of it, or cut it
into  smaller  pieces  for  snacks.  And  I  love  how  easy  it  easy  to  make.  Once  you’ve
prepared  the  dough,  the  only  thing  you  need  to  dirty  is  the  baking  pan,  a  knife,  and  a
cutting board. You can serve it hot out of the oven, or you can bake it ahead of time as
long as there isn’t any cheese on it. Reheating previously baked cheese may be fine for
the dorm room, but all the joys of the texture of melted cheese disappear the second time
around.

To me, a more defining distinction between pizza and focaccia is the texture of the
dough.  I  want  specific  physical  characteristics  for  pizza  dough:  structure  that  can
withstand stretching into a round that I can toss and enough strength that it doesn’t break
when being shaped. But with focaccia I can preshape it into a round as for pizza dough,
then finish spreading it in or on the pan. This opens the door to using any dough to make
focaccia—even whole wheat or rye, which was great for both dipping into hummus and
serving with a delicious pork terrine, flavored with apricots and pistachios, that Greg
Higgins (of Higgins Restaurant and Bar) gave me.

MAKING FOCACCIA WITH BREAD DOUGH

The  flexibility  of  being  able  to  use  virtually  any  dough  for  focaccia  is  great  when  it
comes to the bread recipes in this book, where I always begin with 1,000 grams of flour
and call for dividing the dough into two pieces. If you like, you can bake one loaf as
directed for bread and divide the remaining dough into one to three portions to use for
making focaccia. Shape those portions into balls when you shape the loaf in the bread
recipe,  using  the  method  detailed  there.  Here  are  some  pointers  on  the  size  of  dough
balls for focaccia, depending on how you’ll be baking it:

• For thin-crust focaccia baked in a 9-inch skillet, use about 200 grams of dough.
• For thick-crust focaccia baked in a 9-inch skillet, use about 350 grams of dough (the

standard size for balls of pizza dough).

• If baking on a sheet pan, use up to 875 grams of dough, which is half the yield of a
bread recipe, or whatever fits on your pan, keeping in mind that the thickness will

vary depending on the amount of dough and the size of the pan.

As for method, you can basically follow the instructions for either Focaccia Genovese

or Zucchini Focaccia, but here’s the process in brief.

1. Once the pieces of dough have been shaped into rounds, let them relax, either at

room temperature or in the refrigerator, for at least 1 hour beyond what the recipe
specifies for proofing time. You can also store the shaped dough balls in the
refrigerator for up to 2 days.

2. Coat the dough ball in flour and decompress it on both sides.
3. Preheat the oven to its highest temperature setting.
4. Stretch the dough until it’s the size and shape you want: round for a skillet; oblong

or rectangular for a baking sheet.

5. Top with whatever you like, depending on the dough, what you have on hand, and

your desire.

6. Bake until golden brown on both top and bottom and completely cooked inside.
7. Drizzle extra-virgin olive oil over the top if you like, along with any other

seasonings, such as small-flake sea salt.

8. No need to wait—you can go right ahead and slice and serve. However, do note
most focaccia is very good served at room temperature, so if you’re entertaining,
you can bake it up to 1 hour ahead of time.

CHAPTER 13
PIZZA DOUGHS

SAME-DAY STRAIGHT PIZZA DOUGH

OVERNIGHT STRAIGHT PIZZA DOUGH

OVERNIGHT PIZZA DOUGH WITH LEVAIN

OVERNIGHT PIZZA DOUGH WITH POOLISH

SAME-DAY STRAIGHT PIZZA DOUGH

This  recipe  is  ideal  if  you  want  to  make  dough  in  the  morning  and  bake  pizza  that
evening. It’s even better if you refrigerate the dough balls overnight and make pizza the
next day. What I often do with this recipe is make pizza two days in a row, or pizza one
day, and the next day make focaccia, perhaps to serve alongside a meal, as a predinner
snack, or for lunch.

Note that the dough doesn’t include olive oil, as pizza doughs often do. Therefore it
bakes up crisper, with more open holes in the perimeter of the crust, which is how I like
it. I do think drizzling olive oil on the dough after the pizza is baked is a great idea. The
crust will showcase the flavor of the flour, so it’s best to use a good flour, preferably
soft white 00 flour (see Pizza Dough Overview), Caputo brand if you can get it. If 00
flour  isn’t  available,  use  the  best-quality  all-purpose  white  flour  you  can  obtain.  The
resulting  flavors  will  be  delicate,  sweet  wheat,  and  ideal  for  combining  with  high-
quality tomatoes and toppings.

THIS RECIPE MAKES FIVE 340-GRAM DOUGH BALLS, each of which will yield a thin-crust pizza-
stone pizza about 12 inches in diameter or a thick-crust iron-skillet pizza. If
you use this dough for focaccia, for details on amounts of dough for different
applications.

BULK FERMENTATION: About 6 hours
PROOF TIME: At least 1½ hours
SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Mix at 10 a.m., shape into dough balls at 4 p.m., and make

pizza anytime after 6 p.m. or anytime over the next 2 days.

INGREDIENT
White flour
Water
Fine sea salt
Instant dried yeast

QUANTITY
1,000 g
700 g, 90ºF to 95ºF (32ºC to 35ºC)
20 g
2 g

 
7¾ cups
3 cups
1 tbsp + ¾ tsp
½ tsp

BAKER’S PERCENTAGE
100%
70%
2%
0.2%

1a. Hydrate the yeast Measure 700 grams of water at 90°F to 95°F (32°C to 35°C)
into a container. Put 2 grams (½ teaspoon) of yeast in a separate, small container. Add
about 3 tablespoons of the 90°F to 95°F (32°C to 35°C) water to the yeast and set aside.

1b. Autolyse Combine the 1,000 grams of flour and the remaining 90°F to 95°F (32°C
to 35°C) of water in a 12-quart round tub. Mix by hand just until incorporated. Cover
and let rest for 20 to 30 minutes.

2. Mix Sprinkle the 20 grams of salt over the top of the dough. Stir the yeast mixture with
your finger, then pour it over the dough. Use a small piece of the autolysed mixture to
wipe the remaining yeast goop from its container, then throw it back in the tub.

Mix by hand, wetting your working hand before mixing so the dough doesn’t stick to

you. (It’s fine to rewet your hand three or four times while you mix.)

Reach  underneath  the  dough  and  grab  about  one-quarter  of  it.  Gently  stretch  this
section of dough and fold it over the top to the other side of the dough. Repeat three more
times with the remaining dough, until the salt and yeast are fully enclosed.

Use  the  pincer  method  alternating  with  folding  the  dough  to  fully  integrate  the
ingredients. Cut and fold, cut and fold. The target dough temperature at end the of the mix
is 77°F to 78°F (25°C to 26°C).

3. Fold This dough needs one fold (see Step 3: Fold the Dough for instructions). It’s best
to apply the fold 30 to 60 minutes after mixing. After folding, lightly coat the dough and
the bottom of the tub with olive oil to help prevent sticking.

When the dough is about double its original volume, about 6 hours after mixing, it’s

ready to be divided.

4. Divide Moderately flour a work surface about 2 feet wide. With floured hands, gently
ease the dough out of the tub. With your hands still floured, pick up the dough and ease it
back down onto the work surface in a somewhat even shape. Dust the entire top of the
dough with flour, then cut it into 5 equal-size pieces with a dough knife or plastic dough
scraper. Each piece should weigh about 340 grams; you can eyeball it or use a scale. (If
you plan to use any of the dough for thin-crust iron-skillet pizza or focaccia, divide that
portion of the dough into 200-gram pieces.)

5. Shape the dough into balls Shape each piece of dough into a medium-tight round
following these instructions, working gently and being careful not to degas the dough.

6.  Refrigerate  Put  the  dough  balls  on  a  lightly  floured  baking  sheet,  leaving  space
between them to allow for expansion. Lightly oil or flour the tops, cover with plastic
wrap, and let rest at room temperature for 30 to 60 minutes. Refrigerate for at least 30
minutes to make the dough easier to shape.

See chapter 14 for instructions for shaping, topping, and baking pizzas. Stored in the
refrigerator and tightly covered, any leftover dough will keep for up to 2 days. You may
prefer the next-day dough as it develops flavors with more time in the refrigerator.

OVERNIGHT STRAIGHT PIZZA
DOUGH

This dough recipe has two advantages: First, the long fermentation allows the dough to
develop great flavor. Second, its schedule works for people who have a day job. The
timing  works  like  this:  mix  the  dough  at  7  p.m.;  then,  the  next  morning,  give  yourself
fifteen minutes to divide the dough, shape it into balls, and wrap and refrigerate them.
You can use the dough that evening or anytime over the next two days to make pizza or
focaccia,  using  any  of  the  recipes  in chapter  14.  When  you  get  home  from  work,  all
you’ll have to do is make a sauce and prepare your toppings as the oven and pizza stone
are  preheating.  As  with  all  of  the  pizza  doughs  in  this  book,  use  a  high-quality  all-
purpose  white  flour,  preferably  00  flour  (see Pizza Dough Overview),  ideally  Caputo
brand.

THIS RECIPE MAKES FIVE 340-GRAM DOUGH BALLS, each of which will yield a thin-crust pizza-
stone pizza about 12 inches in diameter or a thick-crust iron-skillet pizza. If
you use this dough for focaccia, for details on amounts of dough for different
applications.

BULK FERMENTATION: About 12 hours
PROOF TIME: At least 6 hours
SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Mix at 7 p.m., shape into dough balls at 7 a.m. the next

morning, and make pizza that evening or anytime over the next 2 days.

INGREDIENT
White flour
Water
Fine sea salt
Instant dried yeast

QUANTITY
1,000 g
700 g, 90ºF to 95ºF (32ºC to 35ºC)
20 g
0.8 g

7¾ cups
3 cups
1 tbsp + ¾ tsp
Scant ¼ tsp

BAKER’S PERCENTAGE
100%
70%
2%
0.08%

1a. Hydrate the yeast Measure 700 grams of water at 90°F to 95°F (32°C to 35°C)
into  a  container.  Put  0.8  gram  (a  scant  ¼  teaspoon)  of  yeast  in  a  separate,  small
container. Add about 3 tablespoons of the measured 90°F to 95°F (32°C to 35°C) water
to the yeast and set aside.

1b. Autolyse Combine the 1,000 grams of flour with the remaining 90°F to 95°F (32°C
to 35°C) of water in a 12-quart round tub. Mix by hand just until incorporated. Cover
and let rest for 20 to 30 minutes.

2. Mix Sprinkle the 20 grams of salt over the top of the dough. Stir the yeast mixture with
your finger, then pour it over the dough. Use a small piece of the autolysed mixture to
wipe the remaining yeast goop from its container, then throw it back in the tub.

Mix by hand, wetting your working hand before mixing so the dough doesn’t stick to

you. (It’s fine to rewet your hand three or four times while you mix.)

Reach  underneath  the  dough  and  grab  about  one-quarter  of  it.  Gently  stretch  this
section of dough and fold it over the top to the other side of the dough. Repeat three more
times with the remaining dough, until the salt and yeast are fully enclosed.

Use  the  pincer  method  alternating  with  folding  the  dough  to  fully  integrate  the
ingredients. Cut and fold, cut and fold. The target dough temperature at end the of the mix
is 77°F to 78°F (25°C to 26°C).

3. Fold This dough needs one or two folds (see Step 3: Fold the Dough for instructions).
It’s best to apply the folds 30 to 60 minutes after mixing. After folding, lightly coat the
dough and the bottom of the tub with olive oil to help prevent sticking.

When the dough is 2 to 3 times its original volume, about 12 hours after mixing, it’s

ready to be divided.

4. Divide Moderately flour a work surface about 2 feet wide. With floured hands, gently
ease the dough out of the tub. With your hands still floured, pick up the dough and ease it
back down onto the work surface in a somewhat even shape. Dust the entire top of the
dough with flour, then cut it into 5 equal-size pieces with a dough knife or plastic dough
scraper. Each piece should weigh about 340 grams; you can eyeball it or use a scale. (If
you plan to use any of the dough for thin-crust iron-skillet pizza or focaccia, divide that
portion of the dough into pieces weighing about 200 grams.)

5. Shape the dough into balls Shape each piece of dough into a medium-tight round
following these instructions, working gently and being careful not to degas the dough.

6.  Refrigerate  Put  the  dough  balls  on  a  lightly  floured  baking  sheet,  leaving  space
between them to allow for expansion. Lightly oil or flour the tops, cover with plastic
wrap, and refrigerate for at least 6 hours.

See chapter 14 for instructions for shaping, topping, and baking pizzas. Stored in the
refrigerator and tightly covered, any leftover dough will keep for up to 2 days. You may
prefer the next-day dough as it develops flavors with more time in the refrigerator.

OVERNIGHT PIZZA DOUGH WITH
LEVAIN

If you’ve built a levain culture, when you use it to make bread you’ll have enough left to
make  pizza  dough  too.  This  pure  levain  dough  recipe,  without  added  baker’s  yeast,
works on a convenient schedule and produces pizza crust with nice poofiness in the rim
and  a  bit  more  acidity  and  complexity  in  taste  from  the  leavening.  I  don’t  mean  to
understate it, this is a great dough. As with all of the pizza doughs in this book, use a
high-quality all-purpose white flour, preferably 00 flour (see Pizza Dough Overview),
ideally Caputo brand.

THIS RECIPE MAKES FIVE 340-GRAM DOUGH BALLS, each of which will yield a thin-crust pizza-
stone pizza about 12 inches in diameter or a thick-crust iron-skillet pizza. If
you use this dough for focaccia, for details on amounts of dough for different
applications.

BULK FERMENTATION: 12 to 14 hours
PROOF TIME: At least 6 hours
SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Feed the levain in the morning, mix the dough at 7 p.m., shape
into dough balls at 7 a.m. the next morning, and make pizza after 1 p.m. or
anytime over the next 2 days.

Levain
INGREDIENT
Mature, active levain
White flour
Whole wheat flour
Water

QUANTITY
50 g
200 g
50 g
200 g, 85ºF to 90ºF (29ºC to 32ºC)

 
Scant ¼ cup
1½ cups + 1 tbsp
⅓ cup + 1 tbsp
⅞ cup

Final Dough

INGREDIENT

White flour
Whole wheat
flour

FINAL DOUGH MIX
QUANTITY
900 g

 
6¾ cups

Baker’s Formula
QUANTITY IN
LEVAIN
80 g

TOTAL RECIPE
QUANTITY
980 g

BAKER’S
PERCENTAGE
98%

0

0

20 g

20 g

2%

620 g, 90ºF to 95ºF (32ºC to

Water

35ºC)

Fine sea salt

20 g

Levain

180 g*

2¾ cups
1 tbsp + ¾
tsp
½ cup + 2
tbsp

80 g

0

 

700 g

20 g

 

70%

2%

10%*

** In wintertime, you may need to use a little more levain, up to about 220 grams.

* The baker’s percentage for levain is the amount of flour in the levain expressed as a

percentage of the total flour in the recipe.

1a. Feed the levain. About 24 hours after your previous feeding of the levain, discard
all but 50 grams of levain, leaving the remainder in your 6-quart tub. Add the 200 grams
of white flour, 50 grams of whole wheat flour, and 200 grams of water at 85°F to 90°F
(29°C to 32°C) and mix by hand just until incorporated. Cover and let rest for 8 to 10
hours before mixing the final dough.

1b. Autolyse After 8 to 10 hours, combine the 900 grams of white flour with the 620
grams of 90°F to 95°F (32°C to 35°C) water in a 12-quart round tub. Mix by hand just
until incorporated. Cover and let rest for 20 to 30 minutes.

2. Mix the final dough Sprinkle the 20 grams of salt over the top of the dough.

Put a container with about a finger’s depth of warm water on your scale so you can
easily  remove  the  levain  after  it’s  weighed.  With  a  wet  hand,  transfer  180  grams  (or
more if your kitchen is cool; see “Seasonal Variations”) of levain into the container.

Transfer the weighed levain to the 12-quart dough tub, minimizing the amount of water
transferred with it. Mix by hand, wetting your working hand before mixing so the dough
doesn’t  stick  to  you.  Enclose  the  salt  and  levain  by  gently  picking  up  the  dough  from
underneath and stretching in three or four folds. Use the pincer method alternating with
folding the dough to fully integrate the ingredients. Cut and fold, cut and fold. The target
dough temperature at the end of the mix is 77°F to 78°F (25°C to 26°C).

3. Fold This dough needs one or two folds (see Step 3: Fold the Dough for instructions).
Make the first fold 30 to 60 minutes after mixing. After the final fold, lightly coat the
dough and the bottom of the tub with olive oil to help prevent sticking.

When the dough is 2 to 2½ times its original volume, 12 to 14 hours after mixing, it’s

ready to be divided.

4. Divide Moderately flour a work surface about 2 feet wide. With floured hands, gently

ease the dough out of the tub. With your hands still floured, pick up the dough and ease it
back down onto the work surface in a somewhat even shape. Dust the entire top of the
dough with flour, then cut it into 5 equal-size pieces with a dough knife or plastic dough
scraper. Each piece should weigh about 340 grams; you can eyeball it or use a scale. (If
you plan to use any of the dough for thin-crust iron-skillet pizza or focaccia, divide that
portion of the dough into pieces weighing about 200 grams.)

5. Shape the dough into balls Shape each piece of dough into a medium-tight round
following these instructions, working gently and being careful not to degas the dough.

6.  Refrigerate  Put  the  dough  balls  on  a  lightly  floured  baking  sheet,  leaving  space
between them to allow for expansion. Lightly oil or flour the tops, cover with plastic
wrap, and refrigerate for at least 6 hours (if you want to make pizza sooner, let the dough
balls you’ll be using sit out at room temperature for 1 hour, then refrigerate for at least
30 minutes before shaping).

See chapter 14 for instructions for shaping, topping, and baking pizzas. Stored in the
refrigerator and tightly covered, any leftover dough will keep for 2 or 3 days. You may
prefer the next-day dough as it develops flavors with more time in the refrigerator.

If you are going to mix a levain bread dough and this pizza dough on the same day,
you will need to double the levain quantity so you have enough for both mixes: 100
grams levain, 400 grams white flour, 100 grams whole wheat flour, and 400 grams
water.

OVERNIGHT PIZZA DOUGH WITH
POOLISH

This dough has two things going for it: a particular flavor provided by the fermentation
of the poolish; and a crisp, poofy-rimmed, delicate crust that has a light texture and open
holes. The dough is leavened entirely with the poolish, which incorporates 50 percent of
the total amount of flour in the dough.

This dough also has higher hydration than the other pizza dough recipes in the book,
using 75 percent water relative to the weight of the flour. This produces a softer dough
that requires two folds, preferably during the first hour of fermentation to give it more
strength  and  tenacity. You  need  to  take  extra  care  when  shaping  pizzas  from  this  soft
dough. Although I’ve learned to toss and twirl this dough it does break and tear more
easily, so the recommended shaping method for this dough is to use balled-up fists to
stretch it into shape (without tossing it), as described in Setting Up Your Pizza Station.

Because the dough isn’t as strong, it’s also important not to load the pizzas down with
too much weight from sauce or toppings. A pizza that breaks when you load it into the
oven isn’t fun to deal with. Another option is to make this dough at a hydration closer to
70 percent. To do so, simply reduce the amount of water in the final dough mix by 40 or
50 grams.

You might think of this as an advanced recipe to try once you’re confident with the
other pizza doughs in this book. A successful pizza made from this dough is well worth
the effort, in taste and texture. It’s also a good example of how dough can be leavened
solely with a poolish and no added yeast. I love the fact that just 0.4 gram of yeast—a
scant ⅛ teaspoon—can leaven a batch of dough that makes five pizzas.

THIS RECIPE MAKES FIVE 350-GRAM DOUGH BALLS, each of which will yield a thin-crust pizza-
stone pizza about 12 inches in diameter or a thick-crust iron-skillet pizza. If
you use this dough for focaccia, for details on amounts of dough for different
applications.

POOLISH FERMENTATION: 12 to 14 hours
BULK FERMENTATION: About 6 hours
PROOF TIME: At least 1½ hours
SAMPLE SCHEDULE: Mix the poolish at 8 p.m., mix the final dough at 10 a.m., shape

into dough balls at 4 p.m., and make pizza that evening.

Poolish
INGREDIENT
White flour
Water
Instant dried yeast

QUANTITY
500 g
500 g, 80ºF (27ºC)
0.4 g

 
3¾ cups + 2 tbsp
2¼ cups
Scant ⅛ tsp

Final Dough

INGREDIENT

White flour
Water
Fine sea salt
Instant dried
yeast

FINAL DOUGH MIX
QUANTITY
500 g
250 g, 105ºF (41ºC)
20 g

0

Poolish

1,000 g

Baker’s Formula
QUANTITY IN
POOLISH

 
3¾ cups + 2 tbsp 500 g
500 g
1⅛ cups
1 tbsp + ¾ tsp
0

0

0.4 g

All from recipe
above

 

TOTAL RECIPE
QUANTITY
1,000 g
750 g
20 g

0.4 g

 

BAKER’S
PERCENTAGE
100%
75%
2%

0.04%

50%*

* The baker’s percentage for poolish is the amount of flour in the poolish expressed as

a percentage of the total flour in the recipe.

1. Mix the poolish The evening before you plan to bake your pizza, mix 500 grams of
flour and 0.4 gram (a scant ⅛ teaspoon) of yeast by hand in a 6-quart tub. Add 500 grams
of water at 80°F (27°C) and mix by hand just until incorporated. Cover and leave out
overnight  at  room  temperature.  The  following  timeline  assumes  overnight  room
temperature is between 65°F and 70°F (18°C and 21°C).

When fully mature 12 to 14 hours later, the poolish should be about tripled in volume
(it comes just below the 2-quart line on my 6-quart Cambro tub), with bubbles popping
on the surface at least every few seconds. Poolish will stay at this peak level of maturity
for about 2 hours, unless your room temperature is warm—say, above 76°F (24°C)—in
which case it will be at its peak for just about 1 hour. At this point you can mix the final
dough.

2. Mix the final dough Measure 500 grams of flour into a 12-quart round tub, then add
the 20 grams of salt and mix by hand.

Pour 250 grams of 105°F (41°C) water around the perimeter of the poolish, loosening
it from its tub. Then pour the water and poolish into the flour mixture in the 12-quart tub.
Mix by hand, wetting your working hand before mixing so the dough doesn’t stick to
you.  (It’s  fine  to  rewet  your  hand  three  or  four  times  while  you  mix.) Use  the  pincer

method  alternating  with  folding  the  dough  to  fully  integrate  the  ingredients.  The  target
dough temperature at the end of the mix is 75°F (24°C).

3. Fold  This  dough  needs  two  folds  (see here  for  instructions).  It’s  best  to  apply  the
folds during the first hour after mixing the dough. After the second fold, lightly coat the
dough and the bottom of the tub with olive oil to help prevent sticking.

When the dough is about 2½ times its original volume, about 6 hours after mixing, it’s

ready to be divided.

4. Divide Moderately flour a work surface about 2 feet wide. With floured hands, gently
ease the dough out of the tub. With your hands still floured, pick up the dough and ease it
back down onto the work surface in a somewhat even shape. Dust the entire top of the
dough with flour, then cut it into 5 equal-size pieces with a dough knife or plastic dough
scraper. Each piece should weigh about 350 grams; you can eyeball it or use a scale. (If
you plan to use any of the dough for thin-crust iron-skillet pizza or focaccia, divide that
portion of the dough into 200-gram pieces.)

5. Shape the dough into balls Shape each piece of dough into a medium-tight round
following these instructions, working gently and being careful not to degas the dough.

6.  Refrigerate  Put  the  dough  balls  on  a  lightly  floured  baking  sheet,  leaving  space
between them to allow for expansion. Lightly oil or flour the tops, cover with plastic
wrap, and let rest at room temperature for 30 to 60 minutes. Refrigerate for at least 30
minutes to make the dough easier to shape.

See chapter 14 for instructions for shaping, topping, and baking pizzas. Stored in the
refrigerator and tightly covered, any leftover dough will keep for up to 2 days. You may
prefer the next-day dough as it develops flavors with more time in the refrigerator.

CHAPTER 14
PIZZA AND FOCACCIA

SAUCES AND TOPPINGS

SMOOTH RED SAUCE

CHUNKY RED SAUCE

TOMATO FILLETS

PIZZA STONE PIZZAS

PIZZA MARGHERITA

THE NEW YORKER

SALAMI PIZZA

GOLDEN BEET AND DUCK BREAST “PROSCIUTTO” PIZZA

SWEET POTATO AND PEAR PIZZA

IRON-SKILLET PIZZAS

IRON-SKILLET MEAT PIE

SKILLET PIZZA WITH TOMATO FILLETS, GARLIC, AND CHILE

FOCACCIA

FOCACCIA GENOVESE

FOCACCIA “PISSALIDIERE”

ZUCCHINI FOCACCIA

SMOOTH RED SAUCE

This is a smooth tomato sauce flavored with dried oregano, along with optional garlic
and  chile  flakes.  Use  the  best-quality  dried  oregano  you  can  get;  if  you  can  find
Calabrian  oregano,  all  the  better. Although  including  chile  flakes  isn’t  traditional  for
Neapolitan pizza sauce, I like the zip. If you can’t find San Marzano tomatoes, use the
best-quality canned plum tomatoes available.

MAKES ENOUGH SAUCE FOR FIVE 12-INCH ROUND PIZZAS

1 (28-ounce) can whole San Marzano tomatoes
1½ tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil
1 clove garlic (optional)
½ teaspoon fine sea salt
¼ teaspoon dried oregano
¼ teaspoon chile flakes (optional)

1.  Place  a  colander  over  a  large  bowl.  Drain  the  tomatoes  for  10  to  15  minutes.
(Reserve the juice for another use.)

2. Put the olive oil, garlic, salt, oregano and chile flakes in a blender. Add the tomatoes
and blend until smooth and thoroughly combined.

CHUNKY RED SAUCE

Sometimes  I  want  a  chunkier  sauce,  and  sometimes  I  like  a  sauce  with  a  more  pure
tomato  flavor.  This  recipes  satisfies  both  desires.  Again,  San  Marzano  tomatoes  are
ideal, but if you can’t find them, you can substitute the best-quality canned plum tomatoes
available.

MAKES ENOUGH SAUCE FOR TWO TO THREE 12-INCH ROUND PIZZAS

1 (28-ounce) can whole San Marzano tomatoes
1½ tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil
Sea salt

1. Place a colander over a large bowl. Drain the tomatoes for 10 to 15 minutes.

2. Tilt the colander and use a wooden spoon to repeatedly push the tomatoes back and
forth to break them into a chunky pulp and drain most of the remaining juice. Do this for
about 30 seconds, then pour the pulp into a bowl. (Reserve the juice for another use.)
Stir in the olive oil and season with salt to taste.

TOMATO FILLETS

Sometimes, it’s just the tomatoes you want. Roasting the tomatoes in advance is optional.
Uncooked,  they’ll  have  a  bright  flavor.  For  deeper,  more  concentrated  and  complex
flavor, roast them slowly with simple seasonings as described here.

MAKES ENOUGH SAUCE FOR THREE 12-INCH ROUND PIZZAS OR THREE TO FOUR IRON-SKILLET PIZZAS

1 (28-ounce) can whole San Marzano tomatoes
Extra-virgin olive oil (optional)
Sea salt (optional)
Thyme sprigs (optional)

1. If roasting the tomatoes, preheat the oven to 325°F (165°C).

2.  Place  a  colander  over  a  large  bowl.  Drain  the  tomatoes  for  10  to  15  minutes.
(Reserve the juice for another use.)

3. Remove the whole tomatoes one at a time and break each into three or four pieces by
hand. Put the pieces on a plate to drain. Reserve any remaining pulp for another use.

4.  To  roast  the  tomatoes,  put  them  in  a  shallow  baking  pan  in  a  single  layer.  Drizzle
olive oil over the top, sprinkle with sea salt, and add a dozen thyme sprigs. Bake for 20
to 30 minutes.

Pizza Margherita

PIZZA MARGHERITA

This  is  the  classic,  basic  pie  that  is  the  standard  for  Neapolitan-style  pizza.  It  should
have  a  thin  crust  with  some  poofiness  in  the  rim,  sauce  made  with  San  Marzano
tomatoes, and fresh mozzarella and basil. The red, white, and green toppings mirror the
colors of the Italian flag.

I  prefer fior di latte mozzarella (literally, “the flower of the milk,” and referring to
mozzarella made with cow’s milk rather than buffalo milk). Grande brand is very good
quality, and their Ovoline variety is shaped into 4-ounce balls that are the perfect size
for this pizza. Whatever brand you choose, look for fresh mozzarella packaged in liquid
brine.

As simple as the Margherita pizza is, defining its ideal incarnation could provoke an
hours-long,  Chianti-filled  evening  of  lively  conversation  and  not  a  little  arm  waving.
Should the cheese be just melted, or browned on top? Should the basil leaves be whole
or torn? Flat rims or poofy? Should the bottom be spotted with dots of char? Should the
rim be lightly browned or have a few charred areas? Should it be finished with olive
oil? You get the idea. I’ll supply you with the basic formula. You take it from there and
bake it the way you like it.

MAKES ONE 12-INCH PIZZA

1 350-gram dough ball from any recipe in chapter 13
White flour for dusting
3 ounces Smooth Red Sauce
4 ounces fresh whole-milk mozzarella cheese, cut into pieces ½ inch thick at

most

6 to 8 whole basil leaves
Extra-virgin olive oil for drizzling (optional)
Fine-flake sea salt, such as fiore di sale (optional)
Chile flakes (optional)

1. Preheat the pizza stone Put your pizza stone on a rack in the upper portion of your
oven  so  the  surface  is  about  8  inches  below  the  broiler.  Preheat  the  oven  to  600°F
(316°C) if you’re lucky enough to have an oven that goes that high; otherwise, simply

preheat to the highest possible setting. Once the oven is preheated, continue heating the
pizza stone for another 30 minutes, for a total of about 45 minutes.

2. Set up your pizza assembly station Give yourself about 2 feet of width on the
countertop. Generously flour the work surface. Position your peel next to the floured
area and dust it with flour. Have the sauce, cheese, and basil prepared and at hand, with
a ladle or large spoon in the sauce.

3. Shape the pizza Remove the dough ball from the refrigerator, put it on the floured
work surface, and gently pat it down a bit to coat the bottom with flour. Leaving about 1
inch of the outer rim undeflated, punch down the middle, then flip the dough over and
repeat.

Using both hands, grab the rim and lift so the dough hangs down vertically. Let gravity
pull the rest of the dough down and stretch it. Run the rim between your hands, working
all the way around the circumference of the dough several times.

Next, make two fists and position them just inside the rim, with the dough still hanging
vertically.  Gently  stretch  and  turn  the  dough  repeatedly,  still  letting  the  bottom  of  the
dough pull down, expanding the surface. Keep a close eye on the thickness of the dough.
You want it thin, but you don’t want it to tear or develop holes. If you end up with a
small tear, don’t panic—it’s okay to patch it.

Spread the dough on the floured peel and run your hands around the perimeter to shape

it into a round and work out the kinks.

4.  Superheat  the  pizza  stone About  30  minutes  after  the  oven  has  reached  its  set
temperature,  switch  to  the  broil  setting  for  about  5  minutes  to  saturate  the  pizza  stone
with heat.

5. Top the pizza Spread the tomato sauce over the dough to within an inch of the edge,
smoothing and spreading it with the back of the ladle. Distribute the mozzarella and basil
leaves evenly around the pie.

6. Bake Turn the oven setting back to bake. Gently slide the pizza onto the pizza stone.

Bake for 5 minutes, then switch to the broil setting and broil for 2 minutes, keeping a
close eye on the pizza. Bake until the cheese is completely melted and the crust is golden
with spots of brown and a few small spots of char. If the oil separates out of the cheese,
it’s overbaked. Use tongs or a fork to slide the pizza from the pizza stone onto a large
plate.

7. Slice and serve Transfer to a large wooden cutting board. Drizzle extra-virgin olive
oil  lightly  over  the  top  if  you  like,  slice,  and  serve  immediately,  passing  the  salt  and

chile flakes at the table. Note that a perfectly baked Margherita pizza has a fairly brief
window of being optimum for eating. You need to wait long enough that you don’t burn
your  mouth  on  the  molten  mozzarella,  but  it’s  best  to  eat  it  before  the  cheese  cools
enough to solidify.

Variation: Top each slice with a handful of arugula.

The New Yorker

THE NEW YORKER

This  pizza  represents  my  ideal  of  a  classic  New York  pizza,  with  a  blend  of  grated
cheeses  covering  a  red  sauce  spiked  with  dried  oregano,  optionally  topped  with
pepperoni. Not all of the great New York pizzas are made with shredded cheese, but
that’s what I prefer for this style of pizza, which is cheesier than the Margherita.

If I were to do this kind of pie in a coal-fired oven like at Lombardi’s or Totonno’s, it
would be bigger than the 12- to 14-inch pizzas we are going to bake on the home kitchen
pizza stone. Compensate by cutting the finished pizza into no more than four pieces.

MAKES ONE 12-INCH PIZZA

1 350-gram dough ball from any recipe in chapter 13
White flour for dusting
3 ounces Smooth Red Sauce
3 ounces fresh whole-milk mozzarella cheese, grated
2 ounces provolone cheese, grated
4 to 6 whole basil leaves (optional)
12 to 15 slices of pepperoni (optional)
Chile flakes (optional)

1. Preheat the pizza stone Put your pizza stone on a rack in the upper portion of your
oven  so  the  surface  is  about  8  inches  below  the  broiler.  Preheat  the  oven  to  600°F
(316°C) if you’re lucky enough to have an oven that goes that high; otherwise, simply
preheat to the highest possible setting. Once the oven is preheated, continue heating the
pizza stone for another 30 minutes, for a total of about 45 minutes.

2. Set up your pizza assembly station Give yourself about 2 feet of width on the
countertop. Generously flour the work surface. Position your peel next to the floured
area and dust it with flour. Have the sauce, cheese, basil, and pepperoni prepared and at
hand, with a ladle or large spoon in the sauce.

3. Shape the pizza Remove the dough ball from the refrigerator, put it on the floured
work surface, and gently pat it down a bit to coat the bottom with flour. Turn it over and

repeat on the other side. Leaving about 1 inch of the outer rim undeflated, punch down
the middle, then flip the dough over and repeat.

Using both hands, grab the rim and lift so the dough hangs down vertically. Let gravity
pull the rest of the dough down and stretch it. Run the rim between your hands, working
all the way around the circumference of the dough several times.

Next, make two fists and position them just inside the rim, with the dough still hanging
vertically.  Gently  stretch  and  turn  the  dough  repeatedly,  still  letting  the  bottom  of  the
dough pull down, expanding the surface. Keep a close eye on the thickness of the dough.
You want it thin, but you don’t want it to tear or develop holes. If you end up with a
small tear, don’t panic—it’s okay to patch it.

Spread the dough on the floured peel and run your hands around the perimeter to shape

it into a round and work out the kinks.

4.  Superheat  the  pizza  stone About  30  minutes  after  the  oven  has  reached  its  set
temperature,  switch  to  the  broil  setting  for  about  5  minutes  to  saturate  the  pizza  stone
with heat.

5. Top the pizza Spread the tomato sauce over the dough to within an inch of the edge,
smoothing and spreading it with the back of the ladle. Sprinkle the cheeses evenly over
the pie and distribute the basil leaves and pepper oni evenly over the top.

6. Bake Turn the oven setting back to bake. Gently slide the pizza onto the pizza stone.

Bake for 5 minutes, then switch to the broil setting and broil for 2 minutes, keeping a
close eye on the pizza. Bake until the cheese is completely melted and bubbling, with a
few small charred spots, and the crust is golden with spots of brown and a few small
charred spots. Use tongs or a fork to slide the pizza from the pizza stone onto a large
plate.

7. Slice and serve Transfer to a large wooden cutting board. Drizzle extra-virgin olive
oil lightly over the top if you like. Slice and serve immediately, passing the chile flakes
at the table.

Salami Pizza

SALAMI PIZZA

This is the cured meat lover’s pizza, essentially a Margherita pizza with the addition of
the salami of your choice. At Ken’s Artisan Pizza, we have two of these pizzas on our
menu:  one  with  a  spicy soppressata  and  another  with finocchiona,  made  by  Olympic
Provisions,  a  local salumeria  making  admirable  dry-cured  sausages.  In  each  case  we
peel the salami, then slice it into thin disks—about 1/16 inch thick for the soppressata and
about ⅛ inch thick for the finocchiona. I love the way the meat crisps as it bakes on top
of the pizza. The more salami you pile on the pizza, the thinner it should be sliced. My
preference is to not overwhelm the other ingredients on the pizza with too much meat;
rather, use it as an accent.

Salumi or salami? Salumi refers to the entire range of cured meat products, typically
made  from  pork  (but  sometimes  from  beef),  from  ham  and  other  salt-cured  whole
muscles  of  meat  to  sausages,  including  cooked  meat  emulsions  in  casings,  like
mortadella. Salami refers to a specific type of salumi: dry-cured sausage, usually made
from pork, which may be either fresh or aged. Use whatever type of salami you prefer,
from pepperoni (an American invention usually made with beef, or with beef and pork)
to chorizo, saucisson sec to Genovese. When using any variety of salami, I like to cook
it  on  the  pizza.  Sometimes  I  make  a  similar  pizza  topped  with  cured  meat,  such  as
prosciutto  or coppa, in which case I like it sliced paper-thin and draped on the pizza
immediately after it comes out of the oven.

MAKES ONE 12-INCH PIZZA

1 350-gram dough ball from any recipe in chapter 13
White flour for dusting
3 ounces Smooth Red Sauce
4 ounces fresh whole-milk mozzarella cheese, cut into pieces ½ inch thick at

most

12 to 18 slices of salami, depending on the size of the salami
4 to 6 whole basil leaves
Fine-flake sea salt, such as fiore di sale (optional)
Chile flakes (optional)

1. Preheat the pizza stone Put your pizza stone on a rack in the upper portion of your
oven  so  the  surface  is  about  8  inches  below  the  broiler.  Preheat  the  oven  to  600°F
(316°C) if you’re lucky enough to have an oven that goes that high; otherwise, simply
preheat to the highest possible setting. Once the oven is preheated, continue heating the
pizza stone for another 30 minutes, for a total of about 45 minutes.

2. Set up your pizza assembly station Give yourself about 2 feet of width on the
countertop. Generously flour the work surface. Position your peel next to the floured area
and dust it with flour. Have the sauce, cut-up cheese, salami, and basil prepared and at
hand, with a ladle or large spoon in the sauce.

3. Shape the pizza Remove the dough ball from the refrigerator, put it on the floured
work surface, and gently pat it down a bit to coat the bottom with flour. Turn it over and
repeat on the other side. Leaving about 1 inch of the outer rim undeflated, punch down
the middle, then flip the dough over and repeat.

Using both hands, grab the rim and lift so the dough hangs down vertically. Let gravity
pull the rest of the dough down and stretch it. Run the rim between your hands, working
all the way around the circumference of the dough several times.

Next, make two fists and position them just inside the rim, with the dough still hanging
vertically.  Gently  stretch  and  turn  the  dough  repeatedly,  still  letting  the  bottom  of  the
dough pull down, expanding the surface. Keep a close eye on the thickness of the dough.
You want it thin, but you don’t want it to tear or develop holes. If you end up with a
small tear, don’t panic—it’s okay to patch it.

Spread the dough on the floured peel and run your hands around the perimeter to shape

it into a round and work out the kinks.

4.  Superheat  the  pizza  stone About  30  minutes  after  the  oven  has  reached  its  set
temperature,  switch  to  the  broil  setting  for  about  5  minutes  to  saturate  the  pizza  stone
with heat.

5. Top the pizza Spread the tomato sauce over the dough to within an inch of the edge,
smoothing and spreading it with the back of the ladle. Distribute the mozzarella, salami,
and basil leaves evenly around the pie.

6. Bake Turn the oven setting back to bake. Gently slide the pizza onto the pizza stone.

Bake for 5 minutes, then switch to the broil setting and broil for 2 minutes, keeping a
close eye on the pizza. Bake until the cheese is completely melted, the salami is crisp
around the edges, and the crust is golden with spots of brown and a few small charred
spots. Use tongs or a fork to slide the pizza from the pizza stone onto a large plate.

7.  Slice  and  serve  Transfer  to  a  large  wooden  cutting  board.  Slice  and  serve
immediately, passing the salt and chile flakes at the table.

Pizza And Focaccia — Golden Beet and Duck Breast “Prosciutto” Pizza

GOLDEN BEET AND DUCK BREAST
“PROSCIUTTO” PIZZA

in 

free 

the  style  of  prosciutto  hams.  Feel 

My  friends  at  Chop,  a  Portland  meat  counter  and  charcuterie  shop,  cure  Magret  duck
breast 
to  substitute  paper-thin
slices of Prosciutto di Parma, Serrano ham, or good salt-cured Virginia or Tennessee
country ham if duck breast “prosciutto” isn’t available. This pizza blends the milky ooze
of  good  mozzarella  cheese  with  the  sweetness  of  golden  beets  and  the  salty  umami
flavors of good cured meat and a little provolone cheese. Be generous with the black
pepper and go easy on the chopped rosemary. 

MAKES ONE 12-INCH PIZZA

1 350-gram dough ball from any recipe in chapter 13
White flour for dusting
One baseball-sized golden beet
3 to 4 ounces fresh whole-milk mozzarella cheese, cut into pieces ½ inch thick
1 ounce grated provolone cheese
1 teaspoon finely chopped fresh rosemary
Ground black pepper to taste
1 to 2 ounces very thinly sliced salt-cured duck breast or prosciutto-style ham

1. Preheat the pizza stone Put your pizza stone on a rack in the upper portion of your
oven  so  the  surface  is  about  8  inches  below  the  broiler.  Preheat  the  oven  to  600°F
(316°C) if you’re lucky enough to have an oven that goes that high; otherwise, simply
preheat to the highest possible setting. Once the oven is preheated, continue heating the
pizza stone for about 30 minutes, for a total of about 45 minutes.

2. Prepare the beet In a medium saucepan, cover the beet with water by 1½ inches
and bring to a boil over high heat. Cook for 30 minutes, or until the beet is just soft when
tested with the tip of a knife (it should still have a little resistance to the knife).

Drain the beet and let rest for 5 to 10 minutes, until cool enough to handle. Slice off
the stem and root, then with a lint-free kitchen towel, rub off the skin. Slice the beet into

3 disks of equal thickness, then quarter the disks to make 12 roughly equal pieces.

3. Set up your pizza assembly station Give yourself about 2 feet of width on the
countertop. Generously flour the work surface. Position your peel next to the floured area
and dust it with flour. Have the beet, cheeses, and rosemary prepared and at hand, along
with the pepper mill.

4. Shape the pizza Remove the dough ball from the refrigerator, put it on the floured
work surface, and gently pat it down a bit to coat the bottom with flour. Turn it over and
repeat on the other side. Leaving about 1 inch of the outer rim undeflated, punch down
the middle, then flip the dough over and repeat.

Using both hands, grab the rim and lift so the dough hangs down vertically. Let gravity
pull the rest of the dough down and stretch it. Run the rim between your hands, working
all the way around the circumference of the dough several times.

Next, make two fists and position them just inside the rim, with the dough still hanging
vertically.  Gently  stretch  and  turn  the  dough  repeatedly,  still  letting  the  bottom  of  the
dough pull down, expanding the surface. Keep a close eye on the thickness of the dough.
You want it thin, but you don’t want it to tear or develop holes. If you end up with a
small tear, don’t panic—it’s okay to patch it.

Spread the dough on the floured peel and run your hands around the perimeter to shape

it into a round and work out the kinks.

5.  Superheat  the  pizza  stone About  30  minutes  after  the  oven  has  reached  its  set
temperature,  switch  to  the  broil  setting  for  about  5  minutes  to  saturate  the  pizza  stone
with heat.

6.  Top  the  pizza  Sprinkle  the  cheeses  evenly  over  the  pie,  then  distribute  the  beet
pieces and rosemary evenly over the top. Grind black pepper to taste.

7. Bake Turn the oven setting back to bake. Gently slide the pizza onto the pizza stone.

Bake for 5 minutes, then switch to the broil setting and broil for 2 minutes, keeping a
close eye on the pizza. Bake until the cheese is completely melted and the crust is golden
with spots of brown and a few small spots of char. Use tongs or a fork to slide the pizza
from the pizza stone onto a large plate.

8.  Slice  and  serve  Transfer  to  a  large  wooden  cutting  board  and  top  with  the
prosciutto. Slice it. Eat it.

Sweet Potato and Pear Pizza

SWEET POTATO AND PEAR PIZZA

Despite  the  fruit,  this  is  a  savory  pizza  that  would  go  great  with  a  bottle  of  rosé  or
bubbles. It’s also not bad as an afternoon snack, or for dinner with a roasted bird.

MAKES ONE 12-INCH PIZZA

1 350-gram dough ball from any recipe in chapter 13
White flour for dusting
1 medium sweet potato, cut into  -inch slices
2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil
Fine-flake sea salt, such as fiore di sale
1 medium pear, such as Comice or Bosc, cored and cut into ¼-inch slices
1 ounce shaved Pecorino Romano cheese
2 tablespoons chopped cilantro
1 ounce grated fresh ginger
1 ounce oil-packed red chile peppers, chopped (optional)
Ground black pepper to taste

1. Preheat the pizza stone Put your pizza stone on a rack in the upper portion of your
oven  so  the  surface  is  about  8  inches  below  the  broiler.  Preheat  the  oven  to  400°F
(205°C).

2.  Prepare  the  sweet  potato  In  a  medium  bowl,  toss  the  sweet  potato  with  1
tablespoon of olive oil and a pinch of sea salt. Place the sweet potato in an oven-proof
skillet and roast for 12 to 15 minutes, or until all the pieces are cooked through but still
firm.

3. Continue to preheat the pizza stone Preheat the oven to 600°F (316°C) if you’re
lucky enough to have an oven that goes that high; otherwise, simply preheat to the highest
possible setting. Once the oven is preheated, continue heating the pizza stone for another
30 minutes, for a total of about 45 minutes.

4. Set up your pizza assembly station Give yourself about 2 feet of width on the
countertop. Generously flour the work surface. Position your peel next to the floured

area  and  dust  it  with  flour.  Have  the  sweet  potato,  pear,  cheese,  cilantro,  ginger,  and
peppers prepared and at hand, along with the remaining tablespoon of olive oil and the
pepper mill.

5. Shape the pizza Remove the dough ball from the refrigerator, put it on the floured
work surface, and gently pat it down a bit to coat the bottom with flour. Turn it over and
repeat on the other side. Leaving about 1 inch of the outer rim undeflated, punch down
the middle, then flip the dough over and repeat.

Using both hands, grab the rim and lift so the dough hangs down vertically. Let gravity
pull the rest of the dough down and stretch it. Run the rim between your hands, working
all the way around the circumference of the dough several times.

Next, make two fists and position them just inside the rim, with the dough still hanging
vertically.  Gently  stretch  and  turn  the  dough  repeatedly,  still  letting  the  bottom  of  the
dough pull down, expanding the surface. Keep a close eye on the thickness of the dough.
You want it thin, but you don’t want it to tear or develop holes. If you end up with a
small tear, don’t panic—it’s okay to patch it.

Spread the dough on the floured peel and run your hands around the perimeter to shape

it into a round and work out the kinks.

6.  Superheat  the  pizza  stone About  30  minutes  after  the  oven  has  reached  its  set
temperature,  switch  to  the  broil  setting  for  about  5  minutes  to  saturate  the  pizza  stone
with heat.

7. Top the pizza  Drizzle the remaining 1 tablespoon of extra-virgin olive oil over the
pie,  then  distribute  the  sweet  potato  and  pear  slices  evenly  over  the  top.  Sprinkle  the
cheese, cilantro, and ginger over the pie, then grind black pepper to taste.

8. Bake Turn the oven setting back to bake. Gently slide the pizza onto the pizza stone.

Bake for 5 minutes, then switch to the broil setting and broil for 2 minutes, keeping a
close eye on the pizza. Bake until the cheese is completely melted and the crust is golden
with spots of brown and a few small spots of char. Use tongs or a fork to slide the pizza
from the pizza stone onto a large plate.

9.  Slice  and  serve  Transfer  to  a  large  wooden  cutting  board  and  slice.  Serve
immediately.

Iron-Skillet Meat Pie

IRON-SKILLET MEAT PIE

Here’s  a  great  way  to  make  pizza  in  your  home  oven  in  a  cast-iron  skillet,  without  a
pizza stone, and without the fuss that goes with tossing the dough, setting it up on a peel,
and  successfully  transferring  it  to  the  preheated  pizza  stone.  As  far  as  the  meat  is
concerned, I’m a traditionalist and very happy with a good salami or sausage that can
stand up to the fifteen to twenty minutes of baking time this pizza requires.

You have more flexibility with the skillet pizza to top as heavily as you want. If you’d
like to load up Chicago-style with sauce, cheese and toppings, just keep in mind that the
more toppings, the longer the bake time.

MAKES ONE 9-INCH IRON-SKILLET PIZZA

1 dough ball from any recipe in chapter 13, 350 grams for a thick crust or 200

grams for a thin crust

3 to 4 ounces of Smooth Red Sauce or Chunky Red Sauce
3 to 4 ounces fresh whole-milk mozzarella cheese, sliced thin, or a blend of

mozzarella and provolone

8 to 10 slices pepperoni or other salami or fresh sausage

1. Preheat the oven Preheat the oven to 525°F (274°C), or as high as it will go if it
doesn’t reach 525°F (274°C).

2. Shape the pizza Give yourself around 18 to 24 inches of width on the countertop.
Generously flour the work surface.

Remove the dough ball from the refrigerator, put it on the floured work surface, and
gently pat it down a bit to coat the bottom with flour. Turn it over and repeat on the other
side. You can compress the perimeter of this dough. Holding the rim, stretch the dough to
the width of your skillet, then put it in a dry 9-inch cast-iron skillet.

3. Top the pizza  Spread  the  tomato  sauce  over  the  dough,  using  more  or  less  sauce
depending on your preference. Scatter the cheese evenly over the sauce, then distribute
the pepperoni evenly over the cheese.

4.  Bake  Bake  for  15  to  20  minutes,  until  the  dough  is  baked  all  the  way  through,

checking  the  pizza  after  10  minutes  and  keeping  a  close  eye  on  it  during  the  last  few
minutes  of  baking.  If  you  want  to  slightly  char  on  the  crust  and  brown  the  toppings,
switch the oven to the broil setting for the last few minutes, keeping an especially close
eye on it.

5.  Slice  and  serve  Remove  the  skillet  from  the  oven  and  place  it  on  a  heatproof
surface. Carefully use tongs or a fork to transfer the pizza to a cutting board. Slice and
serve immediately.

SKILLET PIZZA WITH TOMATO
FILLETS, GARLIC, AND CHILE

This  pizza  is  one  of  my  favorites  for  serving  as  a  predinner  snack,  alongside  a  salad
course, or to accompany a meal. If you want to jazz it up, you could bake it with black
olives and add a few strips of anchovy fillet over the pizza after it comes out of the oven.
Then you could call it The Sicilian. Since this skillet pizza has no cheese and you don’t
want to burn the garlic, the baking time is shorter than that of the Iron-Skillet Meat Pie—
just 12 to 15 minutes. In contrast to my usual preferences, I like this pie baked just until
golden brown.

MAKES ONE 9-INCH IRON-SKILLET PIZZA

1 dough ball from any recipe in chapter 13, 350 grams for a thick crust, or 200

grams for a thin crust

8 to 10 Tomato Fillets
1 clove garlic, chopped
½ teaspoon dried oregano
¼ teaspoon chile flakes
1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil
Fine-flake sea salt, such as fiore di sale (optional)

1. Preheat the oven Preheat the oven to 525°F (274°C), or as high as it will go if it
doesn’t reach 525°F (274°C).

2. Shape the pizza Give yourself around 18 to 24 inches of width on the countertop.
Generously flour the work surface.

Remove the dough ball from the refrigerator, put it on the floured work surface, and
gently pat it down a bit to coat the bottom with flour. Turn it over and repeat on the other
side. You can compress the perimeter of this dough. Holding the rim, stretch the dough to
the width of your skillet, then put it in a dry 9-inch cast-iron skillet.

3. Top the pizza Arrange the tomato fillets evenly over the dough. Sprinkle the garlic,

oregano,  and  chile  flakes  evenly  over  the  top.  Drizzle  the  olive  oil  over  the  top  and
lightly sprinkle salt over everything, including the rim.

4. Bake  Bake  for  12  to  15  minutes,  until  the  crust  is  golden  brown  and  the  dough  is
baked all the way through, checking the pizza after 10 minutes and keeping a close eye on
it during the last 5 minutes of baking.

5.  Slice  and  serve  Remove  the  skillet  from  the  oven  and  place  it  on  a  heatproof
surface. Carefully use tongs or a fork to transfer the pizza to a cutting board. Slice and
serve immediately.

MORE IRON-SKILLET PIZZA IDEAS

Because iron-skillet pizzas get good support from the pan, you can be more liberal
with toppings. I’ve provided a few ideas below, but the possibilities are limited
only by your imagination. You want Hawaiian? It’s okay by me. Bake these in a
525°F (274°F) oven, or as hot as your oven gets if less than 525°F (274°F).

Iron-Skillet Pizza with Red Grapes, Mozzarella, and Salami

3 ounces fresh mozzarella cheese, cut into ¼-inch-thick pieces
10 to 12 slices salami
½ teaspoon dried oregano
Cracked black pepper
20 to 24 seedless red grapes, halved

This combination grew out of a suggestion from Chris Cullina of Argyle Winery, to
top focaccia with split red grapes and pine nuts. The grapes bake beautifully, their
sweetness offset by the cheese and salami that crisps while it bakes. Top the dough
with  the  cheese,  salami,  oregano,  pepper,  and  grapes,  and  bake  for  15  to  20
minutes.

Iron-Skillet Pizza with Cherry Tomatoes and Bacon

12 to 15 whole cherry tomatoes
4 to 6 basil leaves
4 strips of bacon, cut into halves or thirds and lightly cooked
Cracked black pepper

For this pizza, the trick is to lightly cook the bacon, rendering some of its fat while
leaving it uncooked enough that it will crisp but not burn in the oven while the pizza
is baking. Cook the bacon until about halfway to crisp, then let it drain on paper
towels  before  putting  it  on  the  pizza.  Scatter  all  of  the  toppings  evenly  over  the
dough and bake for 15 to 20 minutes, until the bacon cooks to a crisp on the pizza
and the tomatoes crack and burst under the high heat, oozing their juices into the
dough.

Iron-Skillet  Pizza  with  Cherry  Tomatoes,  Garlic,  and  Summer
Squash

1 small yellow crookneck squash or zucchini, cut into ½-inch cubes
1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil
Sea salt
12 to 15 whole cherry tomatoes
4 to 6 basil leaves
1 clove garlic, chopped
Cracked black pepper
Chile flakes (optional)
1 ounce Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese, grated

I like this pan pizza topped with freshly grated Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese right
after it comes out of the oven. It tastes like summer. Toss the squash with the olive
oil and a bit of salt in a bowl, then scatter the squash, tomatoes, basil, and garlic
evenly over the dough. Season with black pepper and additional salt, along with
some chile flakes. Bake for 15 to 20 minutes, until the dough is cooked through.

Deep-Dish Quattro Formaggi Pizza

2 ounces mozzarella cheese, grated
1 ounce provolone cheese, grated
1 ounce Gruyère cheese, grated
¾ ounce Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese, grated

Marco  Frattaroli,  chef/owner  at  Portland’s  Bastas  Trattoria,  suggested  this
combination of cheeses for a classic four-cheese pie. Layer each of the cheeses on
the  dough  in  the  order  listed,  then  bake  for  15  to  20  minutes,  until  the  cheese  is
bubbly and the crust is golden brown.

FOCACCIA GENOVESE

The soulful home of focaccia is along the Ligurian coast of Italy. Genoa is the capital of
Liguria, and focaccia Genovese is a staple of the local cuisine. Traditionally, it’s made
from  a  very  soft  dough,  spread  out  in  rectangular  or  round  pans  and  dimpled  by  the
baker’s fingers in the process of working olive oil into the dough. After being baked to a
golden hue, it’s sometimes topped with more olive oil and a sprinkling of salt.

For  the  basic  Focaccia  Genovese,  use  this  book’s Overnight  Pizza  Dough  with
Poolish, made with either 00 flour or all-purpose white flour. This soft dough can easily
be worked to conform to the shape of the baking pan, then you work in the olive oil with
your hands, sprinkle on some sea salt, and bake it to a golden color. In this recipe I call
for  using  800  grams  of  dough,  baked  on  a  12  by  17-inch  baking  sheet.  However,  you
could also use two pieces of dough, each between 250 and 350 grams, and bake them in
9-inch cast-iron skillets.

MAKES ONE ROUGHLY 12 BY 5-INCH FOCACCIA

800 grams of dough from any recipe in chapter 13,  but  preferably Overnight

Pizza Dough with Poolish

White flour for dusting
½ cup extra-virgin olive oil
Sea salt to taste, fine or small-flake like fiore di sale

1. Bring the dough to room temperature About 2 hours before you plan to bake,
remove the dough from the refrigerator and let it warm to room temperature. This step is
optional but recommended, as it will make the dough easier to stretch and help it hold the
finger dents. In essence, you’re slightly overproofing the dough. It will get gassy before
you flatten it out, and that’s fine.

2.  Preheat  Preheat  the  oven  to  500°F  (260°C).  Very  lightly  coat  a  12  by  17-inch
rimmed baking sheet with a thin film of oil where your dough will rest while baking.

3. Shape and dimple the dough Put the dough on your floured surface, and turn it
over to flour each side. Use your hands to flatten the dough and stretch it to about half the

size of the baking sheet.

Using both hands, grab the rim and lift, letting gravity pull the rest of the dough down.
Run the rim between your hands, working all around the circumference of the dough for
one  or  two  turns.  Transfer  the  dough  to  the  baking  sheet.  Pour  the  olive  oil  over  the
dough and spread it evenly over the dough with both hands, simultaneously spreading the
dough out evenly in the shape of the pan. Enjoy working the oil into the dough with your
fingers, pressing down to make dimples, and using the viscosity of the oil to spread the
dough out in the pan. If the dough resists, let it rest for 10 minutes, then return to it. You
want the dough flattened and dimpled evenly all around. It feels great.

4. Bake Bake for 12 to 15 minutes, until the top is golden brown, the bottom is firm, and
the  dough  is  completely  baked  through.  (With  experience  you  can  judge  the  doneness
with a quick look, but if you aren’t sure, pull it out of the oven and snip through the rim
with kitchen scissors to see if there’s any raw dough inside.)

5. Slice and serve Sprinkle salt over the top. Cut the focaccia into strips (it’s fine to do
this while it’s still hot), and serve.

FOCACCIA TOPPING IDEAS

As I’ve mentioned a few times, I think the sky’s the limit when it comes to focaccia.
Any type of bread dough can be used, and you can really let your imagination run
wild  with  toppings.  Here  are  a  few  suggestions  to  get  you  started.  Then  enjoy
crafting your own, season by season.

– Fresh tomatoes, olives, and rosemary
– Pizza sauce and chopped garlic
– Cheese or a combination of cheeses
– Sliced stone fruit, butter, and sugar
– Chopped herbs

Focaccia “Pissalidiere”

FOCACCIA “PISSALIDIERE”

Pissalidière  is  a  savory  pastry  from  Southern  France,  usually  made  with  caramelized
onions, black olives, and anchovies on puff pastry dough. I like to top focaccia the same
way, and add red chiles for both color and kick. We use oil-packed Calabrian chiles for
our Arrabiata Pizza at Ken’s Artisan Pizza, and I copped some of those for this recipe.
The heat naturally compliments the olives and anchovies, and this focaccia tastes to me
like summer vacation on the Mediterranean coast. Serve it with chilled rosé and a simple
green salad. You can caramelize the onions a day or two in advance.

MAKES ONE ROUGHLY 12 BY 5-INCH FOCACCIA

800 grams of dough from any recipe in chapter 13
White flour for dusting
1 medium yellow onion, sliced thin
½ tablespoon butter
12 to 14 salt-cured black olives
6 anchovy fillets, dredged in their packing oil
1 ounce oil-packed red chile peppers, drained and chopped
2 teaspoons olive oil
Sea salt to taste, fine or small-flake like fiore di sale

1. Bring the dough to room temperature About 2 hours before you plan to bake,
remove the dough from the refrigerator and let it warm to room temperature. This step is
optional but recommended, as it will make the dough easier to stretch and help it hold the
finger dents. In essence, you’re slightly overproofing the dough. It will get gassy before
you flatten it out, and that’s fine.

2. Caramelize the onions Place the onions, salt, and butter in a skillet and cook over
medium-high heat, stirring often to prevent sticking. After five minutes, reduce the heat to
low. Cook for another 20 minutes, stirring occasionally, and make sure to scrape up any
dark bits that stick to your pan. Once the onions are soft and completely brown, turn off
the heat and set aside.

3.  Preheat  Preheat  the  oven  to  500°F  (260°C).  Very  lightly  coat  a  12  by  17-inch
rimmed baking sheet with a thin film of oil where your dough will rest while baking.

4. Shape and dimple the dough. Put the dough on your floured surface, and turn it
over  to  flour  each  side.  Use  a  fist  and  then  your  fingers  to  flatten  out  the  dough  and
stretch it out gently until it is at the desired thickness (I prefer medium-thin for this).

When the dough is stretched out and before placing it on your baking sheet, spread a
very light film of olive oil over one side of the dough, then place the dough oiled-side
down on the baking seet. Dimple the dough with your fingers.

5.  Top  the  focaccia  Arrange  the  onions  evenly  over  the  top,  being  careful  not  to
overload the focaccia, then spread the olives and anchovy fillets on top.

6. Bake Bake for 12 to 15 minutes, until the top is golden brown, the bottom is firm, and
the  dough  is  completely  baked  through.  (With  experience  you  can  judge  the  doneness
with a quick look, but if you aren’t sure, pull it out of the oven and snip through the rim
with kitchen scissors to see if there’s any raw dough inside.)

7. Slice and serve Cut the focaccia into strips (it’s fine to do this while it’s still hot),
and serve.

Zucchini Focaccia

ZUCCHINI FOCACCIA

This recipe is one of my favorites in the summertime and early autumn, when garden-
fresh  zucchini  is  abundant.  Thinly  sliced  disks  of  zucchini  are  spread  out  across  the
dough and resemble fish scales if you stand back and squint. Don’t use the softball bat–
sized zucchinis from your Aunt Zelda’s garden for this; use zucchini that’s just a couple
of inches in diameter. This focaccia looks cool if the dough is shaped into a freeform
oblong on a sheet pan.

MAKES ONE ROUGHLY 12 BY 5-INCH FOCACCIA

800 grams of dough from any recipe in chapter 13
2 zucchini, about 2 inches in diameter, thinly sliced
2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil
Sea salt to taste, fine or small-flake like fiore di sale
Ground black pepper
Chile flakes (optional)

1. Bring the dough to room temperature About 2 hours before you plan to bake,
remove the dough from the refrigerator and let it warm to room temperature. This step is
optional but recommended, as it will make the dough easier to stretch and help it hold the
finger dents. In essence, you’re slightly overproofing the dough. It will get gassy before
you flatten it out, and that’s fine.

2. Preheat the oven and prepare the zucchini Preheat the oven to 500°F (260°C). I
don’t recommend oiling the baking pan, but if you choose to, only oil the part of the pan
that will have dough on top of it, otherwise the oil will smoke. Toss the zucchini with 1
tablespoon of olive oil and a sprinkling of salt until evenly coated.

3. Shape the dough Moderately flour the work surface. Put the dough on the flour and
turn it over to coat each side with flour. Use your hands to flatten the dough and stretch it
to  a  size  and  shape  you  like.  Transfer  to  a  rectangular  baking  pan  and,  using  floured
hands, stretch it out further if necessary and fine-tune the shape. (Alternatively, you can
put the dough in a rimmed baking sheet, lightly coat the dough with oil, and stretch it out

to fill the pan, pushing it to the sides of the pan in each direction.)

4. Top the focaccia Spread the remaining 1 tablespoon of olive oil over the top and
use your hand to evenly distribute it over the surface. Arrange the zucchini over the top,
overlapping the slices. Season with freshly ground black pepper.

5. Bake Bake for 12 to 15 minutes, until the crust is golden brown, the bottom is firm,
and the dough is completely baked through. (With experience you can judge the doneness
with a quick look, but if you aren’t sure, pull it out of the oven and snip through the rim
with kitchen scissors to see if there’s any raw dough inside.)

6. Slice and serve Cut the focaccia into strips (it’s fine to do this while it’s still hot),
and serve, passing the chile flakes at the table.

LAGNIAPPE: OREGON HAZELNUT
BUTTER COOKIES

I was once testing a tart dough made with nut meal and was happy to discover that
the dough also made excellent cookies, and this apparently remained bookmarked
somewhere in my memory. Years later, when we were starting the Monday Night
Pizza venture at my bakery, I wanted to offer complimentary fresh-baked cookies to
go out to each table with the check as a lagniappe—a little something extra. This is
the  recipe  we  used.  The  lagniappe  is  something  of  a  baker’s  tradition  (think
“baker’s dozen”), so this recipe seems a fitting way to end the book.

We  still  make  these  cookies,  continuing  to  use  hazelnut  meal  delivered  to  the
bakery directly from Freddy Guys hazelnut orchard in Oregon’s Willamette Valley.
Hazelnut meal is readily available in markets and online. Alternatively, you could
use almond meal, and in either case, you can grind your own from whole, shelled
nuts.

MAKES ABOUT 75 COOKIES

500 grams bread flour
250 grams hazelnut meal
125 grams granulated sugar
300 grams cold butter, cut into ½-inch cubes
2 eggs
20 grams cold water
½ cup heavy cream
Granulated white or turbinado sugar, for sprinkling

Using a handheld mixer or a stand mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, mix the
flour, hazelnut meal, sugar, and butter until sandy. Add the eggs and water and mix
until the mixture comes together around the beaters or the paddle.

Transfer  the  dough  to  a  lightly  floured  work  surface.  Divide  it  into  4  equal
portions and shape each into a firm roll about 2 inches in diameter. Wrap each log

in parchment paper or plastic wrap and refrigerate for at least 3 hours, until firm.
(For any logs you won’t bake within a couple of days, store them in a ziplock bag in
the  freezer  for  up  to  3  months.  Thaw  them  in  the  refrigerator  overnight  before
slicing and baking.)

To bake the cookies, preheat the oven to 375°F (190°C). Line a baking sheet with

parchment paper.

Cut the chilled dough into ¼-inch-thick slices and place them on the lined pan,
leaving about ½ inch of space between them. Brush the cream over the tops of the
cookies, then sprinkle each with a bit of sugar.

Bake for 10 to 15 minutes, until golden brown.

METRIC CONVERSION CHARTS

VOLUME

Formulas
1 teaspoon = 4.9 milliliters
1 tablespoon = 3 teaspoons = 14.8 milliliters = 3 teaspoons
1 cup = 16 tablespoons = 237 milliliters = 16 tablespoons
1 liter = 4.25 cups

METRIC
15 ml
30 ml
60 ml
90 ml
120 ml
150 ml
180 ml
240 ml
300 ml
480 ml
600 ml
950 ml

IMPERIAL
½ fl oz
1 fl oz
2 fl oz
2.7 fl oz
4 fl oz
5.3 fl oz
6 fl oz
8 fl oz
10 fl oz
16 fl oz
20 fl oz
32 fl oz

U.S.
1 tablespoon
2 tablespoons
¼ cup
⅓ cup
½ cup
⅔ cup
¾ cup
1 cup
1¼ cups
2 cups (1 pint)
2½ cups
4 cups (1 quart)

LENGTH

Formulas
1 inch = 2.5 cm
1 foot = 12 inches = 30 cm
1 cm = 0.4 inch

WEIGHT

Formulas
1 ounce = 28.3 grams
1 pound = 16 ounces = 453.6 grams
1 kilogram = 2.2 pounds

U.S.
½ oz
1 oz
2 oz
¼ lb
⅓ lb
½ lb
¾ lb
1 lb

TEMPERATURE

Formulas
9/5 C + 32 = F
(F – 32) × 5/9 = C

FAHRENHEIT
250ºF
275ºF
300ºF
325ºF
350ºF
375ºF
400ºF
425ºF
450ºF
475ºF
500ºF

METRIC
15 g
30 g
60 g
115 g
150 g
225 g
350 g
450 g

CELSIUS
120ºC
135ºC
150ºC
165ºC
175ºC
190ºC
200ºC
220ºC
230ºC
245ºC
260ºC

GAS MARK
½
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Particular thanks to friends who tested this book’s recipes—the original, cumbersome
versions  and  the  final,  hopefully-not-too-information-packed  recipes  you  see  in  this
book:  Molly  Wizenberg,  Jenna  Murray,  John  McCreary,  Suzy  Narducci,  and  Greg
Higgins.  Additional  thanks  to  special  friends  who  were  there  for  guidance,  editorial
support,  and  technical  Q  &  A:  Shawna  McKeown,  Kat  Merck,  Eve  Connell,  Teri
Wadsworth, and John Paul.

To Alan Weiner, a supremely gifted photojournalist who could make a loaf of bread
look like a work of sculpture, and a field of wheat at sunset look like a slice of heaven.

Particular  thanks  to  the  editorial  and  creative  staff  at  Ten  Speed  Press.  My  editor,
Emily Timberlake, helped turn my web of scattershot ideas into an organized structure
and  guided  me  in  ways  that  always  had  a  sense  of  rightness  to  them.  Designer  Katy
Brown turned the words and photos into a book with such a clean and beautiful aesthetic
that I continue to be dazzled each time I gaze at it. I will be forever appreciative of their
outstanding work.

To  the  gifted  bakers  and  teachers  who  helped  me  learn  my  craft:  Jean-Marc

Berthomier, Didier Rosada, Philippe Le Corre, and Ian Duffy.

Most importantly, to the mentors who helped open my mind to baking at the highest
level:  Michel  Suas  of  the  San  Francisco  Baking  Institute  and  TMB  Baking,  and  Chad
Robertson and Elisabeth Prueitt of San Francisco’s Tartine Bakery. Michel is someone I
will always look up to, and he helps in so many ways, always with good humor and good
advice, it’s impossible to list them all. If we are lucky in life we find the right teacher at
the right moment. For me that happened when I met Chad and Liz in 1999. They readily
shared  with  me  their  approach  to  baking,  and  I  will  always  be  thankful  for  their
generosity.  I  learned  much  about  levain  and  French  country–style  bread  baking  from
Chad,  as  well  as  a  way  of  thinking  about  food  that  agreed  with  me.  His  sharing  of
lessons learned unlocked many doors for me. A thousand thank-yous.

Jack London wrote, “I would rather be ashes than dust! I would rather that my spark
should burn out in a brilliant blaze than it should be stifled by dry rot.… The proper
function of man is to live, not to exist. I shall not waste my days in trying to prolong
them. I shall use my time.”

I  had  recently  become  friends  with  Jimi  Brooks,  a  Willamette  Valley  winemaker,
when he died suddenly in October 2004. Jimi lived large and fully. He wouldn’t take his

days for granted or let his friends talk pipe dreams without prodding them to act on those
dreams. Jimi’s memorial service brought friends and family together to appreciate his
life and share his loss. Several people spoke, telling mostly funny stories that still made
us want to cry. Somebody finished by reading this Jack London quote. It characterized
the fire that burned inside Jimi’s frame, and these words rung around and around in my
head: I shall use my time.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

After  a  twenty-year  career  in  the  high-tech  industry,  Ken  Forkish  decided  to  leave
Silicon Valley and corporate America behind to become a baker. He moved to Portland,
Oregon, and opened Ken’s Artisan Bakery in 2001, followed by Ken’s Artisan Pizza in
2006. Forkish trained at the San Francisco Baking Institute, the CIA Greystone, Toscana
Saporita in Italy, and l’Institut Paul Bocuse in France.

INDEX

A
Advanced levain doughs

Double-Fed Sweet Levain Bread
White Flour Warm-Spot Levain

Amylase
Anchovies

Focaccia “Pissalidière,”

Ascorbic acid
Autolyse step
benefits of
history of
incorporating flour and water
instant dried yeast and
measuring and
skipping
time for, 4.1, 4.2
water temperature and

B
Bacon

Iron-Skillet Pizza with Cherry Tomatoes and Bacon
Pain au Bacon

Baker’s percentages, 2.1, 4.1
Baking

in Dutch ovens, itr.1, 2.1, 2.2, 3.1, 4.1
oven temperature and, 2.1, 2.2, 4.1
pizzas
time for

Bay Village Bakery, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3
Beet, Golden, and Duck Breast “Prosciutto” Pizza
Berthomier, Jean-Marc
Biga

definition of
50% Whole Wheat Bread with Biga
poolish vs.
taste and
texture of
using
White Bread with 80% Biga

Bocuse, Paul
Bouchon Bakery
Boules
Bran-Encrusted Levain Bread
Bread (general)

basic method for
flavor complexity scale for, 4.1, 4.2
guiding principles for
large loaves of
shaping loaves
storing baked
troubleshooting

Bread (recipes)

Bran-Encrusted Levain Bread
Double-Fed Sweet Levain Bread
Field Blend #1
Field Blend #2
50% Whole Wheat Bread with Biga
Harvest Bread with Poolish
Overnight Country Blonde
Overnight Country Brown
Overnight 40% Whole Wheat Bread
Overnight White Bread
Pain au Bacon
Pain de Campagne
The Saturday 75% Whole Wheat Bread
The Saturday White Bread
75% Whole Wheat Levain Bread
Walnut Levain Bread
Weeknight White Bread
White Bread with 80% Biga
White Bread with Poolish

White Flour Warm-Spot Levain

Bread Bakers Guild of America, 1.1, 1.2
Bulk fermentation

allowing for complete
extending time for, 2.1, 2.2
in the refrigerator
testing limits of

C
Calvel, Raymond, itr.1, 2.1, 2.2, 7.1
Cheese

Deep-Dish Quattro Formaggi Pizza
as focaccia topping
Golden Beet and Duck Breast “Prosciutto” Pizza
Iron-Skillet Meat Pie
Iron-Skillet Pizza with Red Grapes, Mozzarella, and Salami
The New Yorker
Pizza Margherita
Salami Pizza
Sweet Potato and Pear Pizza

Chef, definition of
Chunky Red Sauce
Cookies, Oregon Hazelnut Butter
Country Blonde

history of
1.8-kilo boule variation
Overnight Country Blonde

Country Brown

history of
Overnight Country Brown

Crust

character of
color of
oven temperature and

Cullina, Chris

D
Decollogne-Lecocq mill
Deep-Dish Quattro Formaggi Pizza

Della Fattoria, 1.1, 1.2
Dividing step

for bread dough
for pizza dough

Dixon, Jim
Double-Fed Sweet Levain Bread
Dough

autolyse process and, 2.1, 4.1
bulk fermentation for, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4
dividing
extensibility of
folding, 2.1, 4.1
gluten network in
handling gently
kneading
mixing
proofing
shaping
strength of
transferring, from proofing basket to Dutch oven
wet vs. stiff, 2.1, 2.2
See also Advanced levain doughs; Doughs made with pre-ferments; Hybrid leavening

doughs; Pizza doughs; Pure levain doughs; Straight doughs

Doughs made with pre-ferments

50% Whole Wheat Bread with Biga
Harvest Bread with Poolish
Overnight Pizza Dough with Poolish
White Bread with 80% Biga
White Bread with Poolish

Dough tubs
Duck Breast “Prosciutto” and Golden Beet Pizza
Duffy, Ian
Dutch ovens

baking in, itr.1, 2.1, 2.2, 3.1, 4.1
brands of
preheating
sizes of

E

Enzymes, role of
Equipment
Extensibility, definition of

F
Farming, 3.1, 3.2
Field Blend #1
Field Blend #2
50% Whole Wheat Bread with Biga
Finger-dent test, 2.1, 4.1
Flavor complexity scale, 4.1, 4.2
Flour

absorbency of
changing blend of, 11.1, 11.2, 11.3
incorporating water and
protein content of, 3.1, 3.2
quality of
at room temperature
traditional production of
types of
variability of

Focaccias

Focaccia Genovese
Focaccia “Pissalidière,”
hydration and
making, with bread dough, 4.1, 12.1
pizzas vs.
thickness of
toppings for
Zucchini Focaccia

Folding, 2.1, 4.1
Frattaroli, Marco
Fruit

as focaccia topping
in levain cultures
See also individual fruits

G
Gluten

definition of
network
role of

Golden Beet and Duck Breast “Prosciutto” Pizza
Grapes, Red, Iron-Skillet Pizza with Mozzarella, Salami, and
Guiding principles

H
Harvest Bread with Poolish
Hazelnut Butter Cookies, Oregon
Higgins, Greg, 1.1, 12.1
Holt, Tim
Hybrid leavening doughs

Bran-Encrusted Levain Bread
Field Blend #1
Field Blend #2
Pain de Campagne
75% Whole Wheat Levain Bread
Walnut Levain Bread

Hydration, changing

I
Ingredients
Institut Paul Bocuse, 1.1, 2.1
Iron-skillet pizzas. See Pizzas

J
Jones, Steve
Jorin, Robert

K
Kaplan, Steven
Keller, Thomas
Ken’s Artisan Bakery

bread baker’s shift at
history of, itr.1, 1.1
idea for
location of, 1.1, 1.2

Monday Pizza Night at
opening day of
physical layout of

Ken’s Artisan Pizza, 12.1, 14.1, 14.2
Kneading
Kunz, Mike

L
Lactic acid bacteria
Lagniappe (Oregon Hazelnut Butter Cookies)
Lahey, Jim, itr.1, 2.1
Le Corre, Philippe
Levain

balance and
container for, 8.1, 8.2
culture growth for
definition of, 2.1, 7.1
etymology of
experimenting with
feeding, 7.1, 8.1, 8.2
flavor and
flour and, 7.1, 7.2, 8.1
fruit and
hydration of, 7.1, 7.2
ingredients for
liquid
salt and, 7.1, 7.2
schedule for, 7.1, 8.1
seasonal variations for
starting
storing and restoring
temperature and
using
yeast and, 3.1, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 7.4
See also Advanced levain doughs; Hybrid leavening doughs; Pure levain doughs

Limits, testing
Liquid levain

M

Maillard reaction
Maniscalco, Alan
McCarthy, Steve
McMahon, Tom
Measurements

baker’s percentages, 2.1, 4.1
of flour and water
metric, 2.1, bm1.1
volume, 2.1, 2.2, 4.1, bm1.1
weight, 2.1, 2.2, 4.1, bm1.1

Miches, 1.1, 9.1
Mixing step
Mother, definition of

N
National Baking Center, 1.1, 1.2
The New Yorker

O
Olives

Focaccia “Pissalidière,”
as focaccia topping

Oregano
Oregon Hazelnut Butter Cookies (Lagniappe)
Oven

preheating, 4.1, 12.1
temperature of, 2.1, 2.2, 3.1, 4.1, 5.1

Oven mitts, 3.1, 4.1
Oven thermometers, 3.1, 4.1
Overnight Country Blonde
Overnight Country Brown
Overnight 40% Whole Wheat Bread
Overnight Pizza Dough with Levain
Overnight Pizza Dough with Poolish
Overnight Straight Pizza Dough
Overnight White Bread

P
Pain au Bacon

dividing
hydration of
method for
Overnight Pizza Dough with Levain
Overnight Pizza Dough with Poolish
Overnight Straight Pizza Dough
overview of
proofing
Same-Day Straight Pizza Dough
shaping
tossing
yields of

Pizzas

Pain de Campagne
Paley, Vitaly, 1.1, 10.1
Pâte fermentée
Paul, John
Pear and Sweet Potato Pizza
Pépin, Claudine, 1.1, 1.2
Pépin, Jacques, 1.1, 1.2
Pepperoni. See Salami
Perry, Sara
Pincer method
Pistolet shape,
Pizza doughs

assembly station for
baking, in cast-iron skillets
baking, on pizza stones
Deep-Dish Quattro Formaggi Pizza
equipment for
focaccias vs.
Golden Beet and Duck Breast “Prosciutto” Pizza
Iron-Skillet Meat Pie
Iron-Skillet Pizza with Cherry Tomatoes and Bacon
Iron-Skillet Pizza with Cherry Tomatoes, Garlic, and Summer Squash
Iron-Skillet Pizza with Red Grapes, Mozzarella, and Salami
making, with bread dough
The New Yorker
Pizza Margherita

Salami Pizza
Skillet Pizza with Tomato Fillets, Garlic, and Chile
Sweet Potato and Pear Pizza
See also Pizza doughs; Pizza sauces and toppings

Pizza sauces and toppings

Chunky Red Sauce
oregano for
Smooth Red Sauce
tomatoes for
Tomato Fillets

Poilâne, Lionel, itr.1, 1.1, 1.2, 3.1
Poilâne, Max
Poolish

biga vs.
definition of
Harvest Bread with Poolish
Overnight Pizza Dough with Poolish
taste and
texture of
using
White Bread with Poolish

Pre-ferments

definition of
types of
using
See also Biga; Doughs made with pre-ferments; Poolish

Preheating

for bread baking
for pizza baking

Proofing

definition of
finger-dent test for, 2.1, 4.1
for pizza dough
for pure levain loaves
in the refrigerator
testing limits of
time for, 2.1, 4.1, 4.2
for yeast, 3.1, 4.1, 4.2

Proofing baskets

Prueitt, Elisabeth, 1.1, 1.2
Pure levain doughs

Overnight Country Blonde
Overnight Country Brown
Overnight Pizza Dough with Levain
Pain au Bacon
See also Advanced levain doughs

Q
Quattro Formaggi Pizza, Deep-Dish

R
Recipes

baker’s percentages in
choosing
comparing
experimenting with
for novice bakers
reading
shorthand for

Retarder, definition of
Richter, Mark
Rise

final. See Proofing
first. See Bulk fermentation

Robertson, Chad, itr.1, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 3.1, 11.1
Rosada, Didier

S
Salami

Salt

Iron-Skillet Meat Pie
Iron-Skillet Pizza with Red Grapes, Mozzarella, and Salami
The New Yorker
Salami Pizza

-free breads
incorporating, into dough
in levain cultures
quantity of

adjusting
of a bread baker
management
Schreiber, Cory
Scoring
Scott, Alan
Seaton, Timothy
75% Whole Wheat Levain Bread
Shaping step

for bread dough
for pizza dough

Shepherd’s Grain collective, 3.1, 3.2
Skillet pizzas. See Pizzas
Smooth Red Sauce
Soltner, André and Simone
Sourdough. See Levain
Spitz, Dan
Sponges
Sprints, Alan
Squash

sea
types of

Same-Day Straight Pizza Dough
San Francisco Baking Institute, 1.1, 1.2, 4.1, 8.1
The Saturday 75% Whole Wheat Bread
The Saturday White Bread
Sauces. See Pizza sauces and toppings
Scales, itr.1, 3.1, 4.1
Schedule

Iron-Skillet Pizza with Cherry Tomatoes, Garlic, and Summer Squash
Zucchini Focaccia
Starter, definition of
Straight doughs
definition of
Overnight 40% Whole Wheat Bread
Overnight Straight Pizza Dough
Overnight White Bread
Same-Day Straight Pizza Dough
The Saturday 75% Whole Wheat Bread

The Saturday White Bread
Weeknight White Bread

Strength, definition of
Suas, Michel, itr.1, 1.1
Sweet Potato and Pear Pizza

T
Tartine Bakery, 1.1, 11.1
Temperature

conversion chart for
for final mix, 2.1, 2.2, 4.1, 4.2, 5.1
of flour
of oven, 2.1, 2.2, 3.1, 4.1, 5.1
relationship of time and, 2.1, 2.2
of water, 2.1, 2.2, 4.1

Thermometers

instant-read probe
oven, 3.1, 4.1

Time

adjusting
importance of, 2.1, 2.2
relationship of temperature and, 2.1, 2.2

TMB Baking
Tomatoes
canned
Chunky Red Sauce
as focaccia topping
Iron-Skillet Meat Pie
Iron-Skillet Pizza with Cherry Tomatoes and Bacon
Iron-Skillet Pizza with Cherry Tomatoes, Garlic, and Summer Squash
The New Yorker
Pizza Margherita
Salami Pizza
Skillet Pizza with Tomato Fillets, Garlic, and Chile
Smooth Red Sauce
Tomato Fillets
Troubleshooting
Tubs

V
Vitamin C
Volume measurements, 2.1, 2.2, 4.1, bm1.1

W
Wadsworth, Teri
Walnut Levain Bread
Water

changing hydration
incorporating flour and
measuring
quality of
temperature of, 2.1, 2.2

Weber, Ed, Kathleen, and Aaron
Weeknight White Bread
Weight measurements, 2.1, 2.2, 4.1, bm1.1
Wesen, Rollie, 1.1, 1.2
Wheat

farming, 3.1, 3.2
kernels, components of
See also Flour

White breads

Overnight White Bread
The Saturday White Bread
Weeknight White Bread
White Bread with 80% Biga
White Bread with Poolish
White Flour Warm-Spot Levain

Whole wheat breads

50% Whole Wheat Bread with Biga
Overnight 40% Whole Wheat Bread
The Saturday 75% Whole Wheat Bread
75% Whole Wheat Levain Bread

Y
Yeast

commercial, 3.1, 7.1
fresh
incorporating, into dough

instant dried, 2.1, 3.1
in levain cultures, 3.1, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 7.4
natural
in pre-ferments
proofing (dissolving in water), 3.1, 4.1, 4.2
storing

Z
Zucchini

Iron-Skillet Pizza with Cherry Tomatoes, Garlic, and Summer Squash
Zucchini Focaccia

